20th May 1983

VOICE:

On June the ninth you will be able to choose from three people as the next Prime Minister. Which one are you going to give the job to? Which one do you believe can do what they promise? Michael Foot promises he will bring down unemployment, but can he? Every Labour Prime Minister there has ever been has made the same promise. The fact is no Labour government has ever succeeded in getting unemployment down. Certainly Michael Foot wants to bring unemployment down, but how can he with the same old Labour policies? Labour's solution to unemployment is the same as last time: spend spend spend. As a result inflation under the last Labour government halved the value of the pound, yet despite all the money they spent unemployment still doubled. Now what Mr Foot would like to do is to take us out of the common market, despite the fact that two and a half million of our jobs depend upon our trade with the European community. So we know what to expect if Mr Foot were to get the job.

The next candidate for the job is Mr Jenkins. He would like to see himself as the prime minister of a new centre party. It wouldn't be to the left or to the right but sort of in between, so in between that most people find it hard to know what its policies are.

MAN IN STREET:

I don't think that they are quite sure themselves of their policies.

WOMAN IN STREET:

They don't seem to have a definite policy.

2nd MAN IN STREET:

You can't have a lot of confidence because they always seem to be changing their ideas.

2nd WOMAN IN STREET:

I honestly don't believe that they've got anything to offer.

3rd WOMAN IN STREET:

They always try and please everyone but they don't really say anything [inaudible] don't really say one thing or the other.

VOICE:

But are the SDP leaders really in the centre? Let's see. On giving council tenants the right to buy they voted against with Labour. On giving parents legal rights in the choice of their children's schools they voted against with Labour. On encouraging voting by secret ballot in trade unions they voted against with Labour. In fact since coming into being the SDP has voted with Labour eight times out of ten. So is it really a centre party? From its record it appears to be another version of the Labour party, which really shouldn't come as a surprise as its leaders were key members of the last Labour government. Of course Mr Jenkins plans to rule with David Steele, just as Jim Callaghan ruled with David Steele in the Lib Lab pact, but do you remember how that partnership ended? Do you remember the winter of 1979 before the last election when strike followed strike?

Alternatively you could choose to give the job to Mrs Thatcher again. Unlike Mr Foot or Mr Jenkins she has a record to point to. Under Mrs Thatcher's government exports are up to record levels, pensions are up by five percent ahead of inflation, there are five thousand more doctors in the National Health Service and forty five thousand more nurses and midwives. The number of police is up by over nine thousand. Home ownership is up to three families out of five. Productivity per worker is up to record levels, and the standard of living is up. But now look what's down with the Conservatives. Income tax, mortgage rates, inflation to the lowest level for fifteen years, interest rates, government borrowing is down to one of the lowest figures in western Europe. Hospital queues are down and strikes are down. On Thursday June the ninth you'll be able to choose the next Prime Minister, but before giving anyone the job you'd be wise to ask how much money they would want. Mr Foot's plans would cost us around thirty billion pounds a year. Mr Jenkins' at least ten billion , involving debts we and our children would be paying off for years.

But Mrs Thatcher's approach is quite different. Instead of asking you for more she wants to reduce government spending and to continue leading us out of the world recession. So who are you going to give the job of Prime Minister to? It's your country, it's your future , and it's your choice. Britain is on the right track, don't turn back.