7th April 1992

JOHN MAJOR:

I hope that in the next few years that we will carry on with much of the work that has been done in the last few years. In particular I want to see us build a country that is at ease with itself.
I will fight for my belief and my belief is a return to basics in education.

VIRGINIA BOTTOMLEY:

We visited a hospital together and it's a great event - a Prime Minister visiting a hospital - and what's so remarkable is John Major's ability to put people at their ease, to make them feel he understands, to touch people. He knows what it's all about.

JOHN MAJOR:

Thank you very much for what you've done over the last er over the last few months, it's been an absolutely fabulous job.

CHRIS PATTEN:

The people said that he was a rookie Prime Minister who wouldn't be able to tackle the international side of things. Well, look: Gulf War, Kurds, Maastricht - extraordinary piece of negotiating skill, erm calm and er courteous but tough as old boots as well.

TOM KING:

I saw at first hand the courage and resolution of John Major in the most immediate way because at the very start of the Gulf War the war cabinet met and at that moment a mortar bomb landed ten yards outside the cabinet room and the windows were shattered - smoke in the room, the smell of explosive, er I was incredibly impressed by the determination and resolution he showed, he just said er "Why don't we go to another room."

DOUGLAS HURD:

We had a fairly rough second day at the summit at Maastricht in er December because John had I suppose forty, perhaps more, points that Britain had to insist on and the other countries had maybe four or five each. And I remember one in particular at the end which needed everyone to agree to and everyone agreed we went round the table and finally Britain, and John said "I don't agree". Kohl chancellor Kohl laughed at his bravery in doing this and we won the point, and afterwards another big delegation said er "Thank God you did that we didn't quite have the nerve to do that".

CHRIS PATTEN:

I remember him once er pushing a piece of paper across to me er it said er: do you want to come to Stamford Bridge on Sunday? So I passed it back and wrote on it er Yes but who's playing? and he sent it back er and he'd just written on the top - If you don't know you can't come.

JOHN MAJOR:

During the summer, Mr President, I did quite a bit of travelling: Headingley, Edgbaston ...
I've got it I like it and with your help I'm going to keep it.

DAVID MELLOR:

It's never any effort for him to talk to anyone - not in a sort of I'd better do this 'cause that's what politicians are supposed to do kind of way - but just out of a natural interest in people.

JOHN MAJOR:

What we want is a better Britain. A country which is strong in the world, a country where the individual counts, a country of real opportunity where every one of her people is free to choose, a country with a head and a country with a heart. And on April the ninth I have no doubt it is for our kind of Britain that the people of Britain will make their choice.

JOHN MAJOR TALKING HEAD:

There was a lot of work to be done before I called this election. We faced some pretty big challenges. In the Gulf we fought with our allies to free Kuwait. At Maastricht we negotiated a treaty which set out the future of Europe. At home - at home we had to bring inflation down, bring mortgages down and get the economy ready to grow again. That has now been done and now it's time to place our record and our policies before you the voters. I have no doubt about the golden prospects for Britain. Of all the nations in the world I believe none is more respected than ours. Its language has been borrowed, its culture followed, its literature read, and its parliament copied.

I have great ambitions for our country. I want every family to have the freedom to live their lives the way they choose. I want everyone to be able to buy their own home, millions more to have savings and pensions of their own and to be able to pass on to their children the fruits of their life-times' work. I want good state schools, schools that get the basics right, schools that give you a choice for your children and tell you how your children are doing. I want low taxes - every extra pound taken in tax from your earnings is choice denied to you and given to the state. That's why I want to cut taxes. I want everyone to have the comfort of knowing that if ill-health strikes the the best treatment is freely available. It will be. That I promise unreservedly. I want a Britain that's fair and free from prejudice, where people get on because of what they do not because of where they come from. I want people to have peace of mind. I know how important that is to them. That means knowing our streets are safe, knowing that savings will hold their value. Peace of mind means other things too: it means strong defences in a world that's still dangerous, it means Britain's voice must be heard with authority as a secure friend but a formidable opponent. I want Britain to be at the very heart of Europe, but it has to be the right sort of Europe.

I could never accept a federal Europe. I don't want Britain to be run from Brussels, but only the Conservative party are certain to avoid that calamity and only the Conservative party is certain to hold our country together - a country that's achieved so much. I am proud of our United Kingdom. I don't want to see it broken up. It's now sixteen months since I became your Prime Minister. In that time I've been able to lay out the policies that will take us into the future on Thursday. You must decide whether I continue that work. You won't be voting for a day or a week but for five years. Every detail of everyone's lives will be affected by the decision you take. Don't believe for a second that it doesn't matter who wins. It does matter. It matters to Britain and it matters to you.