13th October 1964

Sir ALEC DOUGLAS-HOME:

When I first talked to you as Prime Minister, and that is about a year ago now, I said I would share the government's thinking with you and tell you what we were doing and why. And I did this of course because I want to see government by understanding and consent and not government by compulsion. I hope looking back on these months that you feel that government business has been conducted with efficiency but also with humanity. And it is because government is concerned with individual people that whenever I could in the last three weeks I've been out and away from Downing Street and out in the country. And I'm about to tell you something of what I have found. The Britain that I have seen bears no relation whatever to the picture painted by the Labour leaders of a country which is selfish, gloomy and stagnant. Indeed, quite the contrary. I have found people confident, buoyant and self-reliant and that goes for both factory and farm. With prosperity, I'm glad to say, the people have higher incomes that they're using them wisely and well; to give children a better start in life, to buy their own homes, to take out more savings, to take out shares in industry and thus acquire a stake in the future of their own country. And I think the basic reason why people are confident and happy, and that really is the right word to use, is because there is today work for the members of the family at a good wage and the standard of living has been rising year by year. There has, therefore, never been so much at stake and it is on these two facts, the fact of full employment and the fact of rising standards of living, that I ask you to support the Conservatives.

Of course there are problems to be solved. The young have much wider opportunities than they ever had but they also have new and very often anxious responsibilities. But these are problems which are the problems of prosperity and no longer the problems of poverty and these are the sort problems that we can solve if we work together. So this is the first great issue which you have to decide - whether to put prosperity at risk by adopting socialist policies, remembering always that from full employment and rising standards of living all our hopes for the future and for our children are based. Now there's no doubt whatever that the Labour Party's policies would knock the props away from our prosperity; whether it's nationalisation by the front door, or the back door, it is all the same. State monopolies are clumsy and inefficient and costly. Direction from Whitehall kills the enterprise and initiative on which our export trade depends. High taxation penalises savings and the reckless spending policies which I have called a menu without prices would inevitably lead to uncontrolled inflation.

Now we've had all these policies before, they have not changed them at all and inevitably the evil results would happen again. We have the State monopoly, we have planning by compulsion and when the socialist leaders say that their first task will be to plan every aspect of our lives, they mean it. It means more officialdom and more red tape for that is what Socialism is. Now surely the last thing we want when our major competitors still rely on the individual enterprise system is to turn over from one which suits us so well to a Socialist system which must inevitably cramp our style? Now we want to use the enterprise and initiative of our people to create a society in which tomorrow is always better and more exciting than today, just as today has been better than yesterday and therefore we have programmes of social and economic advance which are tremendously ambitious and here are some of them. Mile upon mile of modern roads - you can see them everywhere you go. Power stations which will serve industry and put power at the elbow of the worker. Schools, colleges and universities which will give to our boys and girls the best education in the world and therefore enable them to compete with their contemporaries in any other country. And a hospital programme in which every mother who needs to do so will be able to have her baby in hospital. And above all, more homes.

Now all these programmes have been published and costed and are within our means, but the Socialist programmes would cost something like one thousand million a year more than our ambitious plans and that is a tremendous sum of money to put on the shoulders of the taxpayer and the ratepayer who are already, of course, bearing heavy burdens . I was talking about homes, and nothing is more important for the young family starting out in life than a good home and so we are going flat out to get the maximum number of houses built. When the Socialists were in office this stuck at two hundred thousand a year. Last year we were able to see three hundred thousand houses built. This year it will be three hundred and seventy thousand houses. Next year four hundred thousand houses.
Now by contrast the Labour Party's programme of nationalising all urban building land is bound to mean fewer homes at higher prices. Now there's another contrast that I would bring to your notice between Socialist promise and Conservative performance and that is in the field, the very important field of old age pensions. Some will remember how acutely the old age pensioners suffered when the Socialist Government was last in office. It wasn't that the Socialist leaders didn't try to help the old age pensioners, they did. But the net result was that at the end of the last five years of Socialist government the old age pension was worth less than it was at the start. Now during the years of Conservative office we have been able to raise the old age pension five times and we've been able to keep it ahead of prices and ahead of earnings too. Now I will never promise more than I feel the Conservative Party can perform. But this pledge I can give: that as the national wealth increases we will add to the basic rate of pension keeping it ahead of prices and we will provide extra for the older pensioners because it is the older pensioners that have the greatest need. And, of course, there will be no question of a means test.

Now there's nothing more important for the old age pensioner or the people on fixed incomes than that prices should be steady and we've managed to keep prices steadier in Britain than in almost any other country in the world. Anyone who's been on the Continent for a holiday knows that. But we must do better still and that is why as Prime Minister, if you'll remember, I insisted on the passage of the Resale Price Maintenance Bill through Parliament. I felt that in no circumstances could we allow prices to be held artificially high against the housewife who is catering for the family. And in the next parliament we shall follow with a Monopolies Bill also aimed to keep prices down. And so the choice that you have is between a high cost Socialist system which will force prices up and a Conservative system in which all our influence will be used to keep prices down.

Now I'd like to give you one more contrast between the Conservative and the Socialist performance and this concerns restrictive practices in industry. If we are to modernise and if we're to expand these must go but they will never go if there is a Socialist government. They didn't even mention the words restrictive practices in their manifesto. And so I ask all of you and in particular the young who want to get ahead, to elect a Conservative government which will throw these obsolete relics out of the window and for good because they have no relevance whatever to our modern times. Now you may have noticed that whenever I've spoken of prosperity, I've spoken of prosperity with a purpose and that is because the purpose of earning wealth is to share it, not only among our own people but among those less fortunate people overseas in the developing countries. For if we gain all the riches in the world and lose our feeling for religion, for service and for sacrifice, then we lose the soul and the character of Britain. And so prosperity for purpose in my mind has a very simple meaning. It means serving ourselves but at the same time serving our neighbour, then we will be one people and our nation will be true at heart.

These then are some of the great issues which you will decide in the privacy and the secrecy of the polling booth on Thursday. But there's another issue about which we don't talk very much but with which we live all the time and on which everything else depends. It concerns the security of the nation and the place of Britain in the international councils of the world. In recent years I have very often described British foreign policy to you as one of strength and conciliation - the strength which in a nuclear age must contain a nuclear arm and conciliation which insists that all disputes should be brought to the negotiating table and kept there until they are settled. Now these policies have stood the tests of all the trials of the Cold War years when any mishandling or misjudgement by the British government could have made all the difference between peace and war. And you yourselves have been able to see the results in the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty which I myself was able to sign in Moscow and in the reduced tension between the Soviet Union and the West which has lifted a weight of anxiety from the minds of men. But as Foreign Secretary and now as Prime Minister, I know that the world is still a dangerous place and it is just at this moment when France and China are becoming nuclear powers that the Socialists would propose to discard all control by a British government over Britain's nuclear arm. Now this is our sole defence against blackmail or attack by a nuclear power and it is our only passport to the highest councils of the world where matters of peace and war are decided in a nuclear age. Now I must make my own position as Prime Minister quite clear. I'm not prepared to contract out of the struggle for peace or to give up Britain's seat at the table to others. Today the Prime Minister of Britain sits with the Chairman of the Soviet Union and the President of the United States where these great matters are decided and that is where the British Prime Minister must be. And so I must be sure that each of you recognises the consequences of such a Socialist decision. It would mean that we surrender all our authority in world affairs and hand over the decision about the future life and the future of Britain to another country. Now this I'm quite sure that you cannot allow and when you're faced with these questions then you cannot answer I do not know, the answer must be Yes or No. Plainly then I've told you my point of view and the responsibility and the choice is now yours. So remember that your vote on Thursday will decide not just your way of living and your standard of life but that of your children too and I believe that when you think seriously about it, you will decide that the right thing is to vote Conservative.