18th March 1966

IAIN MACLEOD:

People. And people who will be going in their millions to vote on March the thirty-first. But of course the people who change governments are those who change their political allegiance. Perhaps from Conservative to Labour, or from Labour to Conservative. Now, what is it that makes a man change his party? Perhaps he's worked for it for years and believed in it, and why does he suddenly change? In the last parliament, there were a number of Conservative Members of Parliament who'd been Socialists. Indeed there were two who had been junior ministers in Lord Attlee's government, and one of them is in the studio tonight. Aidan Crawley.

AIDAN CRAWLEY:

My disillusion with socialism really began with nationalisation. I had honestly believed that when an industry was nationalised those engaged in it would gradually feel themselves the owners and would work with a new interest and enthusiasm. But, for six years, I represented a constituency which had many thousands of railwaymen in it and I found exactly the opposite was true. The boss was still the boss. The job was still just a job and, if anything, management seemed more remote and work more frustrating. And I came to realise that nationalisation is the most expensive, the least efficient and is very often the most soulless way of running an industry. And yet in spite of this and in spite of the fact that every advanced country has turned its back on the idea, nationalisation remains the core of the Labour Party's programme.

Now don't be misled because Mr. Wilson and his colleagues are trying to play this down. Remember it was Mr. Wilson who defeated Mr. Gaitskell and insisted that nationalisation remain the keystone of the Labour Party's constitution. And he's not just supported in this by his left-wing. He's under constant pressure from all the major trade unions and all their representatives in parliament. He couldn't abandon nationalisation even if he wanted to. And what he's put in his manifesto, the nationalisation of steel, of the aircraft industry, of the docks and the integration - as he calls it - of road transport, which really means state control, is, of course, simply the beginning of socialism. Mr. Wilson and his colleagues have made it very plain they intend to take control of what they call the economic heights, which means all the main industries of this country. And, of course, this can only make us poorer.

What this country wants is exactly the reverse. It wants an immense liberation of the skill and effort which is available. And this brings me to the main topic of this programme - the trade unions. I think we're all beginning to understand that the trade unions are holding us back. Because of the restrictions which the unions impose upon the way people work, in industry after industry three men are doing the job that one man should do. And it goes deeper than that. People who want to work and work more efficiently are all too often intimidated. What has emerged since that first "noose trial" was reported I think has woken the country up to how widespread this intimidation is, and this is an ugly thing and it can't be laughed off by anybody. Now these things have got to be tackled. But what is abundantly clear is that no Labour Government could ever tackle them. Neither Mr. Wilson, nor any other Labour leader, is ever going to be able to reform his paymasters. But Ted Heath has pledged the Conservative Party to a radical reform of the conditions in which trade unionism will operate. And I believe this is much the most important issue facing the country and to be decided at this election.

IAIN MACLEOD:

Aidan Crawley pinpoints the first and perhaps the greatest issue of this Election - trade union reform. Well, what are we going to do about restrictive practices? About wild-cat strikes? And how are we going to make bargains between unions and employers legally enforceable? Aidan Crawley and myself are joined by Quintin Hogg.

QUINTIN HOGG:

I've tried to look at this thing primarily from the point of view of law-making and the law, although, of course, it's very highly political as well. Can we afford to leave it all alone, as a heckler suggested to me last night? Well, for many years I thought we should. I was wrong. I don't think we can afford to sweep it under the carpet any longer. Can we afford to leave it to The Royal Commission, as Ray Gunter suggested to me a little later last night? No. I think it's too urgent. And the subjects are too crucial and controversial for any Royal Commission to come to a unanimous conclusion. Can we afford to leave it to the Labour Party? Well, no we can't. They're in the pay of the unions, five-sixths of the votes of the Labour Party conference are controlled by them and no-one can reform his masters. Well then what can we do? Well surely the answer is this. Too long we have gone piecemeal at one little bit of the subject after another. We've got to bring the unions out into the clear light of law. We've got to do for them what we did for the companies over a hundred years ago, in 1862. We've got to establish a court, we've got to establish a code of behaviour, we've got to establish a Registrar, we've got to give them a definite list of privileges and immunities in return for a definite code of responsibilities. They can't go on in this twilight existence, half-way in the law and half-way out any longer. And so that is what we have got to do now.

AIDAN CRAWLEY:

Of course there is one aspect of this immense problem which is only a matter of law in the last resort. I mean restrictive practices. The Labour party is always saying this is something that can only be tackled very gradually. I don't believe that for a moment. I think the answer is really quite simple and very like the system we've adopted for tackling trade, restrictive trade practices, monopolies and so on. We need some machinery to examine restrictive practices and, if they're considered against the public interest, then to report them to the industry itself, and, of course, most of these practices are agreed between unions and management; and only if the industry refuses to put them right, should they be referred to the Industrial Court which could impose sanctions on either management or union, or both. Now do you see any difficulty in that?

QUINTIN HOGG:

No I don't think I do. You see the longer term the matter is the more important it is to deal with it at once. And I must emphasise, of course that when I'm talking about the law I don't mean the criminal law. I mean the great, broad body of legal precept of practice which governs all our lives. Now there are three things I think we can do. The first is to redefine trade dispute, so that a dispute in support of an undesirable restrictive practice is not protected. The second is, as you say, to have the court discuss what is and what is not in the public interest because, of course, there are practices which are connected with health and safety. And the third is that when you get a union demanding more money, as they quite probably do from time to time, and the Court, or the Prices and Incomes Board, is able to say to the union - like it can in the liner trains - "look you're doing this or that", they're entitled to say: "Oh no, if you want to have more money, you must let your industry earn it". And so, of course, you can do all three but the important thing, of course, is the Court.

MACLEOD:

Well let me sum up our main proposals. Now, first, we intend to pass a new Industrial Relations Act to set up an industrial court. And, second, we're going to insist that bargains, freely made between unions and employers, are legally enforceable on such matters as procedure and dispute. In other words, if you've given your word, you should keep it. Thirdly, we're going to repeal the act, passed last year by the Labour Government, which gave the green light to intimidation and we're going to deal with the closed shop. And, lastly, we're going to have a Registrar of Trade Unions and it's going to be his job to see that the rules are fair and he'll see to it that there is disciplinary action which has to be taken and that there's a proper right of appeal. What happened at Cowley, of course, is only a symptom and we intend to strike at the disease.

Now, of course, it's true that it's best if all this can be done by agreement. It's best if restrictive labour practices can be got rid of, by management taking the initiative and unions co-operating with them. And all Ministers of Labour, including myself, for many years patiently followed this course. More perhaps we went on too long. But now we feel, as Quintin Hogg has said, that we must bring in the law and here, once more, we feel that the real call is for action, not words. You know, you've heard in this programme three people talking about this very difficult problem. You've heard Aidan Crawley, partly because of his experience as a member of the Labour Party. You've heard Quintin Hogg, out of his deep knowledge of the law. And you've heard myself, with four years experience of being Minister of Labour. And each of us has come to the conclusion, separately, that legislation in trade union reform is vital. Well I dare say you'll go on arguing this question amongst yourselves. For the moment we leave it there. And now, to comment on some of the main issues that are arising in this general election campaign, Reggie Maudling.

REGINALD MAUDLING:

The main issues are now emerging clearly. At home, there is this great dispute about the size of intimidation in some parts of our industry. In Rhodesia, we say the time has come to try and find a solution, within the constitution, by discussion with Mr. Smith or his colleagues. In Europe, the challenge of the Common Market has sprung alight, calling for clear, determined Conservative action. The clouds are darkening around our economy. The threat of inflation looms more seriously as months go by. Industrial production is no higher than it was twelve months ago but costs of production certainly are. Coal has just gone up sharply and steel will follow. The price dam can never be held indefinitely. The failure of Mr. Brown's incomes policy is now apparent to all.

From these great issues, you can see emerging the most fundamental question of all. Personal liberty and the rights and duties of the individual as citizen, parent, businessman, trade union member - here there is a clear divergence between the Socialist, who would increase State control and dictation, and the Conservatives who emphasise individual opportunity, incentive and the protection of personal freedom and human rights. You can see, in the press, disturbing examples of the dictatorial attitude of the Labour Party. Take, for example, Mr. Crosland's attempts to threaten or cajole local authorities who are not prepared to toe the Government line on comprehensive schools. "Go comprehensive, or you'll get no money," he says. Take Mr. Pannell' s attempts at government by intimidation, threatening builders who start upon projects perfectly legally but ones that don't fit in with the ideas of Mr.Pannell and his colleagues. These are some particular examples. Wider than them, the failure of Mr. Brown's incomes policy is leading the Labour Party steadily down the road to more state intervention, control and compulsion. Here is the parting of the ways between Labour and Conservative. No country can be stable and prosperous unless it has a discipline of its own. We're passing through a stage of transition and you can see the uneasy symptoms, along with the growth of prosperity and the growing passion for education. Along with the strength of voluntary endeavour. Along with the thrusting and the questing qualities of our modern youth. You can see also the unhealthy symptoms. The growth of crime and irresponsibility. The half hearted managements who will not venture into the export business. The wild-cat strikes, the restrictive practices. The inefficiency in many public services. The "couldn't care less" attitude that we see all too often. The truth is there'd be full employment in the Welfare State, the old harsh disciplines have been banished. They must never return. But we must find something to put in their place. The Labour Party turn always to compulsion and to state control.

Our answer is precisely the opposite. We rest our faith in individual responsibility and in self-discipline. The health of our country depends, not on more centralisation and more state control. It depends on releasing the energies of our people in a society based on the recognition of the individual's rights and of his duties to his fellow-men. In this election, you have to choose which path Britain shall tread. It is a solemn choice.
