22nd April 1997

Synopsis:
We see several men wearing donkey jackets with 'New Labour' written on the back. They are carrying a pine-tree up a hill, which they 'plant' next to a fine big tree. Unsurprisingly, since the tree has no roots, it falls down. Throughout the broadcast the men try to prop up the tree with bits of wood etc., but it always fall down. A second visual element consists of newspaper articles which illustrate Labour's changes of mind. The final image shows the fallen 'Labour' tree on the left, next to the 'Conservative' tree on the right.

VOICE-OVER:

A tree without roots cannot withstand the slightest pressure. A party without roots doesn't stand for anything and doesn't stand for long. New Labour have tried to cut off their past by cutting off their roots. They've given up every principle, they've turned their back on all their beliefs, they've abandoned the people who voted for them, and they've ditched everything they stood for to try and look electable, so now there's nothing that can keep them steady.

Tony Blair began this election campaign by asking us to trust him. Twenty times he asked for trust. But how can you trust Labour when they'll say anything, do anything, promise anything, change anything to try and get elected?

A tree without roots cannot withstand the slightest pressure. In the past few months Labour have been for privatisation and then against privatisation. They said they'd be tough on the unions, then they've given in to the unions. They've promised the Scots their own parliament, then cut it down to a parish council. They've been for grammar schools and against grammar schools. They're in favour of GP fundholding and they're against it. They've said they won't do a deal with the liberals and they've said they will. They've said they'd be tough on Europe and they'd give in to Europe. They promised a top tax of forty pence and a top tax of fifty pence. Without roots Labour are blown all over the place. Imagine what they'd be like in government.

At the first blow from the trade unions Labour would cave in. This would mean more strikes. When spending pressures grow Labour would collapse, that's why they're planning an emergency budget in July. This would mean higher taxes and higher mortgages and at the Amsterdam Euro-summit in June when Britain has to decide whether to sign the social chapter Labour would give in on that as well. This would mean massive job losses. Without roots Labour are blown all over the place. Cutting off your roots and ditching your principles may make you look electable but it's very dangerous in government.

CAPTION:
YOU CAN ONLY BE SURE WITH THE CONSERVATIVES
