31st March 1992

VOICE:

What do you want to give your children? Of all the things you want them to have, there may be some things you take for granted. Security. The cold war may be over but just how safe is the world in 1992?

As the old order gives way new conflicts are arising. Georgia, for example. Armenia. Yugoslavia. Despite arms limitation agreements there are still many thousands of nuclear weapons around the world. The former Soviet Union for example is estimated to have how many nuclear weapons? Twenty seven thousand, each one big enough to destroy the City of London.

Are these weapons in safe hands?

Russia and the new republics are undergoing such change and turmoil they still cannot decide who controls their armed forces. The republics have been arguing for control of the Black Sea fleet. Boris Yeltsin has warned that Russia could fall into the abyss.

The former Soviet Union is without the economic means to destroy the older more unstable nuclear weapons still in its arsenals. One such arsenal is holding three times its capacity and according to Pentagon experts the weapons are stored in unsafe conditions which would simply not be allowed in the West. It's quite clear they are incapable of looking after them properly. But as they cannot afford to dispose of these weapons is there a danger they will fall into the wrong hands? After all, there are many nations willing to pay for nuclear technology so nuclear weapons could be in more hands than ever before. So how many countries could have nuclear weapons by the year 2000?

As many as fifteen countries. If it hadn't been for the Gulf war Saddam Hussein's Iraq would have had a nuclear weapon by now. This is the world we and our families live in. In 1992 in such a world we need to work for peace but be ready to defend ourselves.

John Major has shown his commitment to nuclear disarmament when he initiated the first United Nations security council conference for peace and non-proliferation. But in the present unstable world conditions he has made it clear we need to maintain our minimum nuclear deterrent and to keep up our conventional forces, for as the Gulf war showed trouble can come quickly from out of nowhere. But how would Labour protect us? The last three Labour party conferences have pledged to cut defence by how much?

At least twenty seven percent. That's the equivalent of wiping out our entire navy or the army or the air force, or maybe they'd remove a third of each. But how are we to know? Labour has produced over a hundred policy documents on different subjects but how many on Britain's defence? Not a single one. They opposed the deployment of cruise missiles which brought the Soviets to the negotiating table - so can we trust Labour with our nuclear deterrent? They once offered to eliminate our entire nuclear defence leaving the Soviet Union with thousands of nuclear weapons and us with none. We know we can't trust Labour to order the Trident submarine needed to ensure we always have one on active patrol. Can we trust a man who was a member of CND for thirty years to maintain our nuclear deterrent or a party which has at least a hundred MPs who are members of CND? According to the first draft of the guide to Labour candidates, twenty-six of them said they were members of CND. This fact mysteriously disappeared from all but one by the second draft.

Two-thirds of the British public want the protection of a nuclear umbrella, yet two-thirds of Labour party members have said exactly the opposite. Can we really trust Labour? In an increasingly unstable and dangerous world we cannot afford to risk undermining our security with huge defence cuts and an evasive nuclear policy. In 1992 voting Labour is a very dangerous game. Britain is in safer hands with the Conservatives.
