28th September 1964

SELWYN LLOYD:

I like general elections, the fun of public meetings, the arguments, the heckling, the extravagances each way. Last time in the course of the same evening I was called a murderer and a darling - though not by the same person. But I like the election campaign principally because of the chance to talk to a lot of people who are not usually interested by politics, [quarrels] in politics, what one hopes to achieve. Some of you no doubt will get very bored with it all before polling day, but for our democracy it is the vital period.
Of course hard things are said, the critics do not pull their punches, in a free country I hope they never will. But this time the critics of the Conservative Government have started in a remarkable way. The Labour Party's manifesto tells us that Britain is stagnating, our economy is wilting, we are in a decline, our society is vulgar, we believe in nothing but money, the last thirteen years have been wasted, they've been years of vacillation and eccentric pomp. Every abusive cliché has been called into service. Incidentally, all this talk does us no good overseas - it delights our enemies, alarms our friends and makes our customers wonder whether it is wise to place more orders in such an allegedly decadent country.
For my part, I wonder where Labour talkers and writers have been for the past thirteen years. What have they been doing? Do they ever go out and look about them or do they spend their time locked up in some back room? I would like to take the critics or the doubters about the place and show them the new factories, I should like to take them to see Summers Steel Works at Shotton where private enterprise has spent between sixty and seventy million pounds in the last ten years on new developments and where some of the most modern techniques in the world are used. They can see everywhere the thousands of new houses, the splendid new schools, increasing provision for the old and those in difficulty. I know I'm sticking out my neck, I can hear some of you saying - how smug, how complacent, we could show him some bad spots, how dare he say that all is perfect. I haven't said anything of the sort.
Of course there is much more to be done - in slum clearance, housing, education, health services, care of the old, modernisation, preventing rises in the cost of living. But this writing off by the Labour Party of all that has happened since 1951 is wholesale condemnation of our industry and our society is not justified and those who do it are obviously so out of touch with reality that if I were a doubtful voter I would for that reason alone disbelieve the whole of the rest of what they say.
Whatever you think about what has happened, no country can live in or on the past. We seek your support again because of what we intend to do in the future. I can put our objectives in very simple terms. The maintenance of British influence in world affairs, the strengthening of our economic position, the improvement of the standards of living for all our people, not just raising them materially but also improving the quality of our national life. Some of the most important matters are education, housing and health. I am going to ask one of my most respected colleagues in the last House of Commons, Mrs. Evelyn Hill, who has great experience in these matters, to say something about them.

EVELYN HILL:

There is one thing the politicians must understand and that is that so far as their home and families are concerned, women today are clear-headed, realistic and prepared to stand no nonsense. That is why all this Socialist talk about stagnation in the past thirteen years cuts no ice with them. They realise that if things had stood still as the Socialists say, it would mean that the great majority of women were still standing at their kitchen sinks instead of putting the dirty clothes in the family washing machine. That is why I resent this sneering at improved standards. It isn't sordid materialism for a housewife to have the chance of a run in the car at the week-ends or a decent holiday.
During the past thirteen years, as you all know, great strides have been made in building new homes and schools but we will not be satisfied as a party until we have cleared the remaining slums, modernised the older houses and made certain that everyone has a decent home to live in. We will not be satisfied until the older schools have been replaced, until classes have become smaller and every child who qualifies can get to university or a technical college. And we are carrying out a big programme for increasing the number of teachers. The cost of the Health Services in Great Britain has grown from four hundred and ninety million in 51-52 to over one thousand million today and there's been a steady expansion of the service. The ten year hospital building programme is well under way - we can see new hospitals rising, new extensions to older hospitals and the replacement of out-dated wards. The complementary Health and Welfare plan for the next ten years which includes preventive medicine, is administered through the local authority. This plan will include more maternity and child welfare clinics, more health visitors and home nurses and an increasing number of home helps. Additional new homes will be built for the community care of the elderly who can no longer look after themselves. There are many families faced with the sad experience that one of their number is compelled to lead a life apart, a life difficult to manage fully in the family circle. For these physically handicapped and the mentally handicapped there will be new hostels and training centres. The hospital plan will give Britain a hospital service as modern in buildings, equipment and organisation as it already is in medical knowledge and techniques. The health and welfare plan will ensure that all those not requiring hospital care can be properly looked after in their own homes and in the community.

SELWYN LLOYD:

But all these plans depend upon two things - peace and our ability to pay for them. Peace. We, unlike our opponents, consider that we should keep our nuclear weapons, not for vain glory but because we know from experience that being a nuclear military power increases our influence. Some doubt that statement and do so sincerely. To them I would simply say that otherwise we would not have been able to play what President Kennedy described as an indispensable role in the negotiations leading to the Test Ban Treaty last year. That's a fact. I believe that Britain's security and influence for peace and prominence in the world will be greater under a Conservative Government.
The second necessity is that Britain should be able to pay for these expanding programmes. To take an example, for every hundred pounds spent on education in 1951 when we got in, over three hundred and fifty pounds is now being spent, one thousand four hundred millions instead of three hundred and eighty millions and the cost will grow, it requires economic strength and this depends on a whole lot of things - modernisation of factories and plant, money being saved for investment, research, enterprise getting a fair reward, and the ending of out of date restrictive practices. Adding it all up it means that by our efficiency, by our low costs, we must be able to sell our goods abroad in a very competitive world and this will not happen under Labour, under a violent change to compulsory State planning, to more nationalisation, highly centralised controls, deep hostility to private enterprise. I cannot see an unsubsidised private company taking over from a nationalised concern an air service costing the tax payer a million and a quarter a year, without suffering a doctrinaire anti private enterprise spasm.
Our approach is utterly different. We believe in planning by consent, as with NEDDIE, not by compulsion. In voluntary savings - a pound is now being saved for every shilling saved in 1951. In incentives for investment and re-equipment as good as any in the world. In supporting and strengthening free enterprise, in a free society, not one in which people spend their time being pushed about by the government. We want world influence, to use it wisely. We want prosperity to help poorer nations as well as ourselves. We want improvement in our standard of living for all our people, particularly the old and the handicapped and not just materially and there's nothing wrong in that but in other fields as well, personal behaviour, moral values, the arts and sport. We claim no monopoly of wisdom, things did not suddenly become perfect when we came to power. Mistakes will be made but if you return us again we will do what we honestly believe to be right. Good night.
