14th February 1974

VOICE:

We've heard a lot lately about special cases, but in a fair society there are quite a few special cases.

FIRST NURSE:

We've accepted our pay offer and I think that we are a special case but we've been reasonable about it.

SECOND NURSE:

Well people they just don't have a sense of responsibility these days. I mean everyone seems to want to grab everything for themselves. They don't think about the consequences, what effect it's having on other people especially the old in the community. I mean these are the innocent ones who have to suffer. And it's no wonder that the public will get angry when things go on like this. They can take so much I think; they can have sympathy with these different strikers but in the end they are going to get jolly cross about it all and say well get back to work and do your job.

VOICE:

Being fair to everyone is what Conservative government is all about. Responsibility for those who can't look after themselves is very much at the doorstep of Sir KEITH JOSEPH.

KEITH JOSEPH:

We very much want to bring help to those who need it. We've expanded the National Health Service and the social services that help people at home and in the community at record rates. But we know how much there's still to do. We shall go on improving services for the elderly. There have been record increases in the number of home helps and district nurses, for instance, and for the mentally handicapped and the mentally ill, the disabled and the deaf. We shall try to help deprived children. We are paying benefits now, invalidity benefits and attendance allowance that just didn't exist when we came to office, to more than half-a-million households to help the chronically sick and those so disabled that they need constant attention.

But the largest single group of people who need help are the pensioners. Labour did produce one decent increase for them in their first year of office, but, for their remaining five years they did virtually nothing. An increase every second year, just enough to keep pace with prices. We've done better. An increase now every year and big enough, after allowing for rising prices, to enable pensioners to buy a bit more each year.

So, compared with Labour, a bigger average increase in real buying power twice as often. And, on top, two ten pound lump sums and pensions for the over-eighties. I'm not saying the pension is as high as we'd like it to be. Indeed not. Not as high, for instance, as in Holland or Germany - much more prosperous countries - perhaps because they don't have strikes the whole time. Strikes hurt pensioners. So, we've moved to an annual increase. And now we're going to move to an increase every six months. There'll be an increase later this year and thereafter about every six months for pensioners, war pensioners, widows and those on attendance allowance and invalidity pension. We shall at least keep pace with prices and we shall try to make each increase a real one, better than is necessary to keep pace with prices, as we've done up to now. We know there's much more to do. We shall go on as we have these last years making real improvements particularly in the services and cash needed by the elderly and the disabled.

PENSIONER:

Well I don't think if Mr Wilson had been in that we would have got that ten pounds at Christmas and also we wouldn't have got the rises that we have got with the Conservatives; and we pensioners have to live in the same markets as their big wage does.

VOICE:

Stage three of the Government's incomes policy is the fairest way to share the national cake. The power workers have already had their slice. So have the school-teachers and the nurses. So far, six-million people have settled for a reasonable slice, but there are some people who want more than their fair share and we don't think that's fair.

WILLIAM WHITELAW:

Shall I tell you something I personally find deeply disturbing and, from the people I've talked to as I travel up and down the country, I don't think I'm the only one. That young nurse we saw earlier summed it up when she said: "People don't seem to have a sense of responsibility any more". If that's true, then we really are in a bad way. Perhaps I am old-fashioned but I was brought up to believe that, because you were lucky enough to be born in a free country, and thank heaven this still is a free country, if you ever found yourself in a position of any authority, then the price of that authority was a thing called responsibility. This Conservative Government has gone to great lengths to look after those who can't look after themselves. That, to me, is the real test of any government. And you can never do enough, but I do believe we've tried harder and done more than any government in modern times.

But you know that's only part of it because a government has got to be fair to everyone and there are an awful lot of people who don't have a powerful organisation to protect them. In fact, that's most people. And it's most people who get crippled by that terrible disease called inflation. It's to prevent that disease turning into an epidemic we've called this election. We've just got to behave sensibly and it's the responsibility of government to make sure that we do. The sad thing about the present situation is the talking's stopped. When disagreements go deep, whether they are well-founded or not, they don't go away in five minutes.

One of the things I learned in Northern Ireland is it's no good giving up. You must go on until you find a solution. Of course, it takes two to talk. For instance, we want to talk to the unions about our new proposals on strike pay. We want to be fair about them but we do think things will have to change. It doesn't seem fair to me that you should foot the bill for someone else to strike, especially if that strike is going to upset your life, while that union has quite a lot in the "kitty". It comes back to responsibility. Trade unions are powerful organisations and so they should be, but the price of that power is responsibility. Isn't it fair that they should put their own hand in their own pocket first?

After that, of course, it is the duty of government to make sure that families do not suffer. And then the Labour Party. They've got responsibilities, too. But I do wish they'd show more signs of accepting them. It really isn't responsible to promise things without saying how you propose to deliver them. Blank cheques are all very well but they are inclined to bounce, and it really isn't enough to say: "Well we'll solve everything because we've got good connections with the unions." It's not too difficult to have good connections if all you ever say is yes.

I remember someone saying to me about Labour at the last election: "They are just fighting to stay in office. They don't have a cause." Well, we have a cause. We are most definitely fighting for something. We are not fighting against the unions. We are not fighting against the miners. We are fighting to save this country and all the people in it from the sleeping sickness of inflation and we will do whatever is required. We shall fight the dangers from outside, whether they be the cost of oil or the world price of food. These things are bound to affect us but to be forewarned is forearmed. We shall fight the dangers within. We have no intention of allowing extremists to divide us as a nation. This election finds us at a moment of decision and at such moments in our history we have never failed to put aside our differences and act as one. I have no doubt that we shall do so again. We need each other. We must stand by each other. That is the responsibility each of us has. Don't let us forget it.

VOICE:

Have you heard about Harold Wilson and his magic money? The miners want a bit more - well give it to them. But what about nationalising a couple of hundred companies? Well why not? Food subsidies, won't they cost a few bob? Well, it's only money. When you've got magic money it doesn't matter what you promise or what things cost. And where does Harold Wilson get his magic money? From you.
