24th March 1966

PEGGY FENNER:

Have you noticed, as I have, a great difference between this election and the last? Last time the Labour Party were full of promises and we all know how few of their promises have been kept. Well this time we don't hear so much about what they intend to do. What we do hear is a lot of smears and scare stuff about what they say the Tories are going to do - the means test, prescription charges and the like. These are the old tired arguments - we've heard them all before. Personally, to me, what matters is the future. There's the rising cost of living, as anyone managing a household budget knows only too well, but perhaps above everything else I want to see a good education for our children, so that they can get on in life. For me, these are the key issues of this election.

IAIN MACLEOD:

Mrs Peggy Fenner, candidate and housewife, speaking for herself but I would guess for millions of other people as well. And also, in the studio, Edward Boyle, Ernest Marples and Reggie Maudling. New let me first dispose of the two smears that Mrs Fenner mentioned and both of which came into the Labour Party's television programme last Tuesday. First of all, the suggestion that we would introduce a prescription charge at four or five shillings. This, I tell you categorically, is a lie. Mr. Heath has already made it quite plain, and I repeat to you, that it would be at the former level of two shillings and with special exemptions. Now of course there is a conflict of priorities here. We believe, for example, that one should build more hospitals rather than give free drugs to everybody, however wealthy they may be. Can I give you a simple illustration? In the seventeen months of socialism they've added eleven thousand Civil Servants and that at a cost of eleven million pounds, and this money could build eleven hospitals a year. Well don't you think it would make more sense if it did?

The second smear - this is the old one about the means test. It's rubbish, but they love raising it and let's just look, therefore, at what Miss Herbison, the Minister of National Insurance, said in the House of Commons on the seventh of March: "We never hid that the income guarantee would be based on means. This scheme will also be based on means. We have never tried to hide that."

And, of course, she's talking about the socialist schemes, so much for them. And, finally, the suggestion that the Tories want unemployment. In fact there was full employment all these thirteen Tory years. And the socialists are indeed now claiming that unemployment is at its lowest level for ten years. Right. So it is. Ten years ago I was Minister of Labour and I'm grateful to them for the compliment. Now let me put, quite quickly to you, the key points of our welfare proposals.

One. See that everybody has a good pension with their job on top of the state basic pension, and no means test. Two. Ensure that everyone can either transfer or preserve their pension when they change jobs. Three. To give more generous aid to children in families where the income is below minimum need, to the very old, to the chronically sick, to the severely disabled and to others most in need. Four. Help people who have put by some savings by raising the amount which can be disregarded before a supplementary pension is granted. And fifthly, provide a pension for those too old to be covered by National Insurance. And on this last point let me remind you that a Bill to provide pensions for the very old was introduced into parliament by a Conservative member and it was concerted action by the socialists which defeated it. And Mrs. Fenner finished on the question of the education of our children. Now we want to talk to you about priorities in education: Edward Boyle.

EDWARD BOYLE:

Our policy on education - the service with which I've been proud to be associated with for nearly ten years now - starts with a need to get more teachers and improve the primary schools. Primary school teachers have done a magnificent job with children of very varied abilities, coming from very different homes, and they've done this job often under conditions of extreme difficulty and large classes. That's why we mean to go on as we did before, beating the targets we set ourselves in the admission of student teachers to the colleges, encouraging married women to return to teaching by a drive for more nursery classes, and, as I promised when I was Minister of Education, we shall spend millions of pounds each year on improving old primary school buildings.

Now, coming to secondary education, as Peggy Fenner said, we shall encourage, as we've always done, local authorities to extend full opportunities to every child. But we, as a party, repudiate the socialist doctrine set out in Mr. Crosland's two circulars that the only way to achieve this is to impose nothing but comprehensive schools everywhere, irrespective of local needs and the performance of good existing grammar and secondary modern schools. Of course we agree there are areas of the country where comprehensive schools make good sense. But we are dead against the bogus comprehensive - joining together two or three widely separated school buildings and calling them a single school.

And don't let any of us forget what a first-class grammar school in a big city has often meant to the bright child from a poor area. Or, for that matter, what many first-class secondary modern schools have been able to do for late developers.

The sixth-form standards in our grammar schools are admired all over the world and we just cannot afford, as a nation, to see these devalued. And then, finally, we shall restore the cuts the Socialists have made in the university and technical college building programmes. Now really what a very extraordinary decision that was. The universities, I believe, must expand as the sixth forms expand. We need much mere trained manpower in this country and how on earth can Mr. Harold Wilson reconcile the cuts in his Government's provision for higher education with all that he himself said at the last election - you may remember his words about what he called forging a new Britain in the white heat of the scientific revolution.

IAIN MACLEOD:

Yes, indeed. Education. It's the best investment of all in our future. But all our plans for that future depend on the management of our economy and on the efficiency of our administration. Reggie Maudling.

REGINALD MAUDLING:

The Labour government's economic record has been one of muddle, incompetence and broken promises. They were to expand production. In fact it has stagnated. Taxes were not to go up. They've gone up right, left and centre. Mortgage rates were to come down to three per cent. They've gone up to nearly seven. The rise in the cost of living was to be halted. In fact the value of the pound has fallen already by more than a shilling. For all this, Mr. Wilson offers one hackneyed excuse. He says he inherited from us a deficit of seven-hundred-and-fifty-millions and that he has already, by his measures, reduced this by half. His argument is entirely bogus. I'll explain to you why this is so.

In 1964, we invested abroad three-hundred-and-fifty millions, in oil wells, mines and factories - new assets to bring income and strength to Britain, not what you and I generally understand by a deficit. Production was rising rapidly, we were building up stocks and preparing for the export boom of 1965, as the export orders came pouring in. I'm being quite clear that this would have been a strain in 1964 and that rather than restrict the growth of industry we would draw on our reserves, just as an expanding business borrows more working capital for a time from its bank.

But the main fact is that what Mr. Wilson inherited from us was not the problems of 1964 - 1964 was more than three parts over when the Election came - its problems had been handled by the Conservative Government without any loss of confidence abroad. What he inherited, in fact, was the prospects of 1965, an entirely different matter. Production and exports were rising fast. There were adequate reserves to deal with any trade deficit. In fact, Mr. Callaghan made it clear at the time that, without any action at all being taken, the deficit would come down by half in 1965. And this is what Mr. Wilson now boasts is the great achievement of his economic policies.

The truth is that, despite the benefit of the stocks built up in our day, despite an improvement in international prices, worth a hundred million a year to this country, despite this the Labour Government with their higher taxes, intense credit squeeze, high interest rates, industrial stagnation, they have achieved no more improvement in our balance of payments than would have come about automatically anyway. This is why I said to you that their hackneyed excuse is completely bogus and this appears clearly from their own evidence. The need for restriction, high taxes, high interest rates, arose from the collapse of confidence in the pound brought about by the initial follies of the Labour Government and now the total failure of Mr. George Brown's incomes policy, by their inept handling of the bank rate, the imports surcharge, by their threats of new taxes, by their first inflationary budget in November '64, but, above all, by the way they went around deliberately exaggerating the difficulties Britain was facing, the Labour Government destroyed confidence abroad. They brought about the sterling crisis. They have left this country now saddled with an additional nine-hundred-million pounds of overseas debt that must be repaid over the next few years. The prospects for the future are, frankly, ominous. Pressure on prices and pressure of imports must continue to grow so long as production remains stagnant and a torrent of new demand pours through the holes in Mr. Brown's policy.

To restore confidence, to resume economic progress, there must be a change in the management of our affairs. There must be a return to a policy of incentives, of competition, of modernisation and the attack on restrictive practices of all kinds, a return - in a word - to Conservative management and to Conservative policies.

IAIN MACLEOD:

One of the earliest car-stickers said: "Come Back Marples" and when you see the hash the Socialist Ministers of Transport have been making you can understand why. Now Ernest Marples has been making an intensive study both here and in many countries abroad, including America and Japan, of the latest methods of cutting costs. To summarise his conclusions, here is Ernest Marples.

ERNEST MARPLES:

My trip abroad was the most exciting, stimulating and rewarding trip I have ever made in my life. And my most vivid impression was about the American government. There has been a shattering managerial explosion. The American Government had insisted, both by contract and other methods, that private enterprise gives great value for money. I've brought back with me the whole details of how it is done and how they cut costs. Let us look at an example of how they really have cut costs. In the Department of Defence alone, they've saved one-thousand-five-hundred-million pounds in one year and not by cancelling aircraft carriers or reducing the number of aircraft. They've saved it by having the same number of aircraft, the same number of aircraft carriers but at a lower price. Now how are we going to do it here? We're going to set up a cost effectiveness department under the Prime Minister who will be Mr. Heath. And this cost effectiveness department will issue instructions and directives to other Government departments in a number of ways. It'll alter the buying policy of most of the government departments. It will set a target for the cost reductions they've got to achieve. It will insist on progress being reported to the Prime Minister every so often and it will really be affected in every possible way. They'll have skilled personnel who will be available to give advice on the most modern managerial techniques to all Government departments. But all this, you know, means a change in our attitude.

The lesson I learned from the Japanese was this. The manufacturer of the famous radio firm who made the first transistorised radio said to me the motto of his firm was: "If our product won't change and can't change then we're in a dying industry and we ought to get out of it". And, therefore, we've got to do the same. He then went on to say to me but in Britain you have a handicap because you have a proverb which says you mustn't change for changes sake. He said but if we change, and we're all in a world market together, and you in Britain don't change, then you're out of business and we're in business, so you've got to change. I'm sure we can. Now, if the Tories are returned at this election under Mr. Heath, and we have a cost effectiveness department, I will stake my reputation that that cost effectiveness department will be successful.

IAIN MACLEOD:

The last time I heard Ernest Marples make a pledge like that was thirteen years ago when we became the government and he promised that we would build three-hundred-thousand houses and we did. So there it is. As Mrs. Fenner said, it's the future that really matters. There's nothing new, there's nothing exciting about the Labour proposals. But there is about ours and we'll achieve them. Goodnight.
