Thursday 24th May 2001

Synopsis

In the first part of the broadcast a teenage girl lies on her bed, doing her homework. We hear her concerns about how teacher shortages are affecting her education.This is followed by a sequence showing what children get up to when teacher shortages mean they can't go to school. This consists of stealing from shops, burning cars, buying and selling drugs and spraying graffiti.
The second part of the broadcast shows what might happen to the economy if the UK joins the Euro. We see a man buying expensive petrol priced in Euros, a dejected fisherman on the dock reading a sign - in English and French - allowing him to fish for only three days a week, a market stall where English apples are priced in Euros (and sold in kilos), and a businesswoman tearing up an EU directive in disgust. Finally we see a museum exhibit: the pound c.1500-2002. In voice-over we hear a newsreader 'reporting' on the dire consequences of greater European involvement for the UK.



TEENAGE GIRL:

I just don't get this. Miss Wilkins could explain it, but she's gone. And Mr Pritchard didn't last long. Gary and Lee made sure of that. I hope the new one sorts them out. I've got GCSEs next year. Bet they open up the school for that.

CAPTION: 9am English
(A deserted classroom, then we cut to a newsagents where unruly schoolchildren are stealing sweets.)

CAPTION: Teacher shortages at their worst for ten years.

CAPTION: 12pm Games
(A deserted playground, then we cut to a group of schoolboys dancing round a burning car on a wasteground.)

CAPTION: 10,000 teacher vacancies in secondary schools.

CAPTION: 2pm Maths
(A deserted classroom, then we cut to schoolchildren buying and selling drugs in a subway.)

CAPTION: Some schools on a 4 day week.

CAPTION: 3pm Art
(A deserted art room, then we cut to schoolchildren spraying graffiti on a bridge.)

CAPTION: What are your children really learning under Labour?

CAPTION:	NOT ALL PARTIES ARE THE SAME
Conservatives will offer parents discipline,
standards and choice in schools.


NEWSREADER:
There was more bad news today for the British economy as it continued its slide down the European growth table. Analysts claim that showing prices and reporting other financial information in pounds and euros is slowing down the British economy.
The European central bank has imposed a one percent increase in UK interest rates in line with the rest of the European Union. Once again there are major concerns from businesses throughout the UK about the financial power shift to Brussells.
The European parliament today announced it's now in the final stages of imposing an energy tax on companies of all sizes within the EU.


CAPTION:	NOT ALL PARTIES ARE THE SAME
Only the Conservatives will keep the pound.
We want to be in Europe, not run by Europe.
Vote for Common Sense,
Vote Conservatives.
