Conservative 11.6.70

WOMAN:

Politicians, well, they don't understand a WOMAN's point of view.

WOMAN:

They never think about, well, a normal housewife's budget etc. They don't seem to understand, well, rents and things like that. I know my husband I expect will vote Labour again. All he seems to worry about is if he can get his next rise, but I definitely wouldn't vote for Labour again.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

You've got a mind of your own and a vote of your own. Don't waste it. And there seems to be every possibility that for the first time a general election will be decided not just by the party faithfuls, but by a hidden majority who traditionally have voted by habit but now seen determined to vote by conviction - the British housewife. Now just why this is likely to happen is the subject of tonight's edition of A Better Tomorrow.

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY:

If anyone else had been treated like the British housewife has been treated during the last six years hard labour, someone would have started a society for the prevention of it.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

If anyone else got a slice of the cake, she was left with the crumbs. When prices rocketed, she was expected to cope with a housekeeping budget that seemed permanently frozen. Iain Macleod will return to this later.

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY:

Basically, the housewife feels she has been taken for granted. She feels that her opinion is taken for granted and her vote is taken for granted and if, by any chance, she watched Mr Wilson a few minutes ago, it's unlikely she found anything to reassure her. From the way prices are going, she knows there's a problem.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

She's got a pound note that's worth fifteen and seven. Where she could have bought a few little luxuries, she now has to settle for the basics and as for putting anything by for that holiday, well she can forget it.

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY:

In this country to-day, there are fifteen million of her and next Thursday, June the eighteenth, she's going to hand out a few surprises of her own, if this story is typical.

SYLVIA:

Well for people like myself, it's got very tough for us, we can afford our rent and maybe our shopping but that's about all. After that, we're stuck for our pleasure and money for entertainment because everything just goes on the high cost of living all the time. It really has got tough, especially for young people starting off. I mean they've got nothing, nothing to look forward to at all really except trying to make their money stretch to the cost of living.

VOICE OVER :

Name: Sylvia. Age: twenty-two. Occupation: working housewife with one child. Date: June the ninth 1970.

SYLYIA:

I get very depressed you know, thinking I go to work all the week and I come home and I clean the house and I still haven't got any money and still always broke. By the end of the week I've got nothing and I'm just waiting for next pay-day again, and it's not because I squander, because I haven't got the money to squander. It just goes on everything, you know there's always something crops up and everything being so dear, you just need every penny you can, and I've got one child now and I'm having to work as it is and all my money seems to go just on food, rent and you know a few extras and then it's gone. I don't seem to be able to save for a house. We've got a car but you know that's about all we will have I think.
Yes, I have got a washing machine, but you know just a small one. It doesn't spin or do anything else. It just washes and then the clothes have to be taken out of it and put in the sink, you know. Well I would like one of the automatic ones, you know that does everything.

My husband's a driver. He drives, delivers, you know, deliveries to shops and things. He doesn't earn a great deal to start with and most of it is taken out in tax. He's hardly got enough to keep the family going, after all the deductions have been made. Well I don't see that things could get much worse and the cost of household goods has risen tremendously in the last few years. It just seems never ending. It's gone up and up and up and up and up. Every single time you go to buy something it's a few pennies dearer, a fear shillings dearer. You just don't know where you are when you work out how much something's going to cost because when you go to buy it it's so much more. Everything you go to buy, washing powder, washing-up liquid, everything's risen tremendously. I used to go into the shops and get my weekend shopping and there's a matter of about two pound difference now to what I used to pay on various articles I have to buy. When I get my bill it used to be about two pound cheaper than it is now and clothes are very expensive now. You have to really shop around to got you know anything, any bargain at all, everything's really expensive. His clothes are nearly as dear as mine in his little size.

A working person has always voted Labour but I think a lot of people have changed their mind now and won't vote Labour again. I mean the promises that everything was going to be better but nothing seems to have got better. The wages have risen a little bit but the cost of living has taken over that and so we've got, we haven't got anywhere at all you know really. With all the strikes and things going on you can't say that they've managed the country at all well, otherwise it would be peaceful over here and it's not. It's forever strikes and things going on. I think things would be a lot better under the Conservatives, Conservative government. They can't make the government in the country any worse, so they have to make it better, see how it goes, and they promised to put down the taxes didn't they, and lower the cost of living for us. For our own sakes we must believe this and give them a trial I think.

Well I think my husband will vote Labour because he's always voted Labour and generations before him have voted Labour and he's not easily persuaded, you know, to vote anything else. I think he will keep up his tradition of voting Labour, but I certainly won't. I shall vote Conservative and I think he'll come over to my way of thinking sooner or later. We haven't had them in for five years and I think it's about time we gave then a try.

IAIN MACLEOD:

She's right you know and she's talking to you, in particular to the housewives of Britain. Can you afford the ten-bob pound? Because that's what'll happen if the Socialists win. And can you afford a frozen wage packet, because that's what'll happen if the Socialists win? Socialism means rising prices and high taxation, always has done, always will do. They don't even trust you to spend your own money. But the Tories will reduce taxation. I promise you that. There will be no compulsory wage freeze. I promise you that. And we will attack at the very root the rising prices of socialism, I promise you that. More freedom. More choice. And lower taxation. That's the Tory way, the better way. So, vote Conservative on June the eighteenth.
You know you can't afford not to. You can't afford the ten bob pound. You can't afford the rising prices of socialism. They've let you down. Throw 'em out. They just don't care.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH

Finally, what does a better tomorrow mean to Sylvia?

SYLVIA:

At the moment, it's just hope. That's all it is at the moment and it's hoping there will be such a thing as a better tomorrow. And I think that if we have a change of government, my hopes may be gratified.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

How you vote is your business and only your business. It doesn't take a moment or cost you anything but, with the wrong decision, you could have quite a price to pay.
