6th October 1964

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Nationalisation. Cor, I'm dead against it. I wouldn't 'ave nationalisation at any price. I'd soon get out of it if ever it come again. I think transport would be worse off with it. Definitely be worse off. Might just as well join the ruddy army and 'ave done wi' it.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

There's no question about industry depending on road haulage. It must have an efficient haulage system to clear the product from the factory and to get it to the vessels in time. Difficulties have been experienced with delays in other forms of transport where vessels have sailed before the goods have got there. In our system if we pick up goods in Nottingham this afternoon they are delivered alongside tomorrow morning in any of the Ports which we serve. But if they centralised control at Whitehall and tried to operate road haulage from there from one central office, they will lose efficiency, they'll lose all personal touch with customers, they'll lose the expert knowledge of particular customers which smaller operators have, they'll gain nothing at all in my opinion by so doing. You see it gets too big and unwieldy. Free enterprise is by far in my opinion the better system because it enables the person to be able to choose and we are given the incentive to work.
EDWARD DU CANN: In every town and village in Britain, private enterprise transport, the big lorries, the vans, are delivering the goods. Imagine the dislocation nationalisation and controls would cause and imagine too the effect upon the men who work in transport and on their families. As Minister of State at the Board of Trade my responsibility is Britain's exports. We're making progress. Over the last five years exports have increased by twenty five percent and they're up again this year. And over the last twelve months I've visited seventeen different countries negotiating contracts for Britain - North America, South America, behind the Iron Curtain, Africa - and of one thing I'm absolutely certain. It's this: that nationalisation and controls and higher taxation will not add one pennyworth to Britain's exports, indeed they may even lose us orders. For we all know the truth. The world doesn't owe us a living, we have to make it by our competitiveness, by our inventiveness, by grasping every opportunity.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

I believe it's very important to have a society where people can back their own hunch. Where people can think of a bright idea and then with a modicum of luck and with good health and by picking the right people to work with, see that hunch grow into an idea that benefits not only them but the community at large. We now employ over four hundred people and twenty three out of thirty six of our top executives have all come right up from the floor - operators, inspectors, progress men. They have shared in the success of the company. My job's mainly concerned within the taking on of personnel for the shop floor, once we've taken them on looking after them, welfare, first aid and various things in general, lots of little things that could be neglected. Everyone within this organisation feels that we are going places not only by the product we turn, the type of service we give, which we like to feel is the best, but because everybody has the right heart.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Well, we started from a garage with a very limited capital in 1951 and we've now got a factory occupying [thirty six]square feet, employing one hundred and sixty people. I think we must be satisfying our customers both in design and price. We're very conscious of the need to export and in this direction we're very fortunate in the fact that we mostly contract to the business machine industry which I believe about ninety percent of which is exported. Apart from that we do export typewriter parts direct to Holland which we hope to expand as we go along. Our main line of endeavour now is to create more engineers to take part in this highly skilled production. To this end we run an extensive apprenticeship training scheme. As a small company we had a part to play in training. We felt we had a part to play in training and started this school about nine years ago to produce boys not only for ourselves but engineering in general. They serve a six month probationary period with us and at the end of that time some stay with us, three lads, usually three lads, go to the [Waddon] Training Centre for their first year apprenticeship.
Well I think the door is wide open for anyone starting up on their own because I think that as organisations get bigger in the main they get less efficient. If you take the thing one further you get an organisation as big as nationalised industry, it's almost a music hall joke the fact that they're not always all they should be. Therefore if someone starts up on their own and gives personal attention and personal service to a job then I think he's bound to get airborne.

EDWARD HEATH:

There are two men who have seized their opportunities. Their firms have the right ideas, their companies are a success. And I know from my experience at the Board of Trade that these are two among many. These are the people who get the results. It can't be done by Labour politicians sitting in Whitehall. I believe that the British people want to have the opportunity to show their enterprise and initiative. They want the government to create the conditions in which they can do this. That is our policy.
When we came into power in 1951 we dismantled Socialism and the result was a great upsurge of energy and enterprise in the British people. And this has led to all the achievements of recent years. We began our programmes at once in housing and in schools, 1954 in roads, in 1955 in railways, 1956 in technical colleges - these were the foundations. And then in this last Parliament we have carried further programmes on a much wider basis leading to the great expansion of the Universities, the hospital building programme and so on, and the regional development programmes which are all co-ordinated. These programmes are the springboard for future success. We shall drive ahead with them.
The Labour Party says it will produce a centralised plan. It will back this up with further nationalisation and with government interference in industry. The Labour Party says it will go back to the purposive planning of 1945-51. The climax of purposive planning of 1945-51 was the de-valuation of the pound, rocketing prices, increase in taxation and in 1951 they ran away. None of that was either planned or purposive.

EDWARD BOYLE:

One of our most important programmes is our programme for extending education after school. Conservatives know that Britain needs more trained manpower at every level - scientists, engineers, craftsmen and apprentices as well. And we also realise that there are many more young people all the time wanting to achieve some qualification after leaving school. Well that's why we're doubling the University population within eight years; the ten Colleges of Advanced Technology which have been pioneers in advanced engineering studies are to get University status and we are also going to spend much more money on the technical colleges, the technical colleges which provide a certain amount of degree level work and advanced courses but also large numbers of part-time courses including part-time courses which provide a second chance for boys and girls who haven't gained any major educational qualification while at school. And then we're also setting up a number of Industrial Training Boards which will make it far easier for young workers in industry to get release during the day for a technical course. Now our policy for extending education after school is linked to our policy for science and technology. We want to help industry to use the latest discoveries and we want to make the whole of industry and also all Whitehall more science and technology minded and I believe as the years go on we shall see the results of these policies more and more in all parts of the country.

EDWARD DU CANN:

Of course, fine modern buildings like those we have just been looking at, remind us just how rapidly the methods of construction change and that's why Conservatives attach such importance to the training and re-training in industry and also why we intend to bring in wage related social security benefits so that people can change their jobs more easily. But in addition, surely, fine buildings are an important part of our society. When we go abroad we all of us want to look at the new buildings overseas and very many visitors from abroad have greatly admired some of our post-war buildings like our schools. And this takes me back to the Conservative theme of this Election - Prosperity with a Purpose. We want to use increases in our national wealth wisely so as to build a more attractive society.

EDWARD HEATH:

That will not be done by the methods proposed by the Labour Party. There is no other industrial country in the Free World which uses those methods today - not even those with Socialist Governments and we must not go back to them.
What we will do is this. We will get the national priorities right, putting our industry and our exports first and these must meet the needs of the consumer. The Labour Party always thinks first of the producer but if we are to hold our own in this modern world we must meet the needs of the consumer. You the housewife, the shopper and the overseas buyer. And how shall we do it? We will do it in this way - first through private enterprise and if we encourage private enterprise then we must see that it gets the rewards which it deserves. It's no use making demands on private enterprise and then sneering at the rewards which it gets. We want to see better management and we are setting up the colleges to produce it. We want to see greater competition, to make enterprise still more enterprising and this we will secure through our further legislation on monopolies, mergers and restrictive practices. We must see the re-equipment of industry, greater use of automation and new mechanical devices. We want to see the improvement of scientific development and the extension of education. We shall secure our expansion through our Regional Development programmes and above all, we must see a change in attitudes, a change in attitudes in this country towards industry and exports, the abandonment of restrictive practices.
Of course there is nothing easy about this. We have seen that already. This is a challenge - a challenge from which the Labour Party when confronted has always retreated. The Beeching Plan - no, they will stop it. Resale Price Maintenance - they funked it. The South-East Plan - they will cancel it. In every occasion in practice when they have been faced with modernisation, the Labour Party has run away. This policy which I have put before you is two-pronged. It is to provide the means of expansion and to remove the obstacles to expansion. We now have the resources and the opportunity to break out of the circle of economic problems which has confronted us since the war and with which the Labour Party is still obsessed. Our policy is not a cry for restraint - it is a call for expansion, expansion to produce greater happiness and greater prosperity to the people of this country as a whole.
