9th October 1964

R. A. BUTLER:

Now this is the last week-end of the campaign and there is one vital issue to decide - namely have we the strength and authority behind our foreign policy and our diplomacy to keep and preserve peace and perform all our diplomacy with success? I believe that we are the one Party who have provided that and can provide it in the future. When I talk about strength I mean economic strength as well as strategic strength and I am going to say a word about both.
We have kept the economy so strong and so much have we increased our prosperity that we have been able to treble, that is to increase three times, the help to the poorer nations of the world. Now if there is one problem which affects me as Foreign Secretary it is the relationship between the richer nations and the poorer nations. Because unless we can help the poorer nations we shall not be able to deal with the trouble, the famine, the disease and the consequent spread of Communism which may result between the richer and the poorer nations. This problem of the richer nations and the poorer nations is just as important as the problem of East-West relations which I discussed when I was in Moscow. There is a relief of tension and that relief of tension is due to the fact that each side respects the other. They respect us because of our strength and it is the fact that we have our own nuclear deterrent which has given our voice that extra strength and which has kept the peace between us. Now this question of keeping our own nuclear deterrent is the vital issue I want you to decide and you will decide it in our favour because the Socialists are not only muddled about their Defence policy but they say that they want to do away with our own independent nuclear weapon. I am convinced, without it that we cannot keep the peace through strength. I am convinced that our voice will not be strong enough in the future negotiations which we want to undertake. We want to try and stop the spread of nuclear weapons. We want to make further progress with disarmament and in all these matters our voice will be stronger if it is known we are speaking from strength. And in that way we shall hope to keep the peace through strength.

REGINALD MAUDLING:

Yes, strength. Economic strength. This is the condition of all that we want to do abroad or at home. And in these years of Conservative Government our economic strength has Grown enormously. Look around you. Look at the new factories, the new roads, the new workshops production is at record levels, employment is full, earnings have never been so high - the steel industry that Mr Wilson wants to nationalise has just recorded record levels of output and of exports. We have launched on a bold policy of expansion and I say bold deliberately because it will call for great efforts and it will involve difficulties and I do not wish for one moment to minimise the difficulties. Because nothing that is worth doing in this world is really achieved without effort. But the question is which Party's policy is more likely to solve the real problem, the real and urgent problem which I told you about at the start of this campaign, which is how to increase Britain's export trade.
We Conservatives say the answer can only be more enterprise, more competition, accepting new ideas, grasping change, sweeping away all restrictions on output and efficiency. This is the way of progress, this is the way to achieve the objective, the bold ambitious objective we have set before ourselves as a nation.
And what of the Labour Party? I must say to you quite frankly as Chancellor, that their policies would be as disastrous as their speeches are damaging. Many of the wild exaggerations put about by some of their leading speakers positively contribute to making our problems more difficult. We are at the moment borrowing money abroad, as I always said we would borrow money abroad, as part of our programme just as any expanding business might borrow from its bank, just as every big country in Europe and North America has done in recent years. And yet the Labour Party prefer to sneer at Britain alone for doing what every other country does. And then their policies - nationalisation, they don't say nationalisation of what - they don't say how they will bring about the nationalisation of steel for example, which is at the basis of more than half of our export trade. But then there is their programme of expansion. A programme which they know perfectly well goes far beyond what any responsible party could possibly promise the British people.
That perhaps is why they won't answer the question what will their programme cost. We've asked them often enough and you should be interested because you'll have to pay the bill. They should tell you surely how much their programme will cost you. Why don't they? There can only be one of two reasons: either they do not know or they will not tell. Whichever it is it seems to me, whichever the reason, this makes their programme wholly unacceptable to the people of this country. Our programme on the other hand is worked out and costed in detail. It's based on experience and on achievement. Take for example housing.

KEITH JOSEPH:

To build more and faster we must use new methods as well as old. This year twenty-five thousand homes are being built in new ways. Here are two hundred in a brand new British labour-saving building system. We've built four million houses since 1951 and modernised another million. Nearly one-third of the population are living in houses built or modernised since we came to power. We've cleared half the slums. Nearly half the houses in the country are owner-occupied. Nearly three-quarters of the houses in the country are modern or modernised. A larger proportion of houses in Britain have bathrooms, lavatories, hot water, than in any European country except Switzerland.
Of course there's still a great deal to be done, with rising population and with people marrying younger and living longer. That's why we're accelerating. This year we'll complete three hundred and seventy thousand houses - more for Councils, more for owner-occupiers and from now on we're building through non-profitmaking housing societies, scores of thousands of fine houses which can be got for a deposit of about one hundred and fifty pounds. There are four hundred and thirty thousand houses now under construction. We'll complete four hundred thousand houses next year and at least that from then on.
Labour's policies amount to a confidence trick. They try to give the impression that they'd do more but their target is four hundred thousand - the same as ours, copied from us, the target we shall reach next year. They propose not a single extra house, not a single extra house and their cock-eyed Land Commission would slow down the vital supply of land. The only way to tackle house and land prices is to build more houses and end the shortage and that's what we're doing. Labour's Land Commission would mean fewer houses being built than now.

EDWARD HEATH:

If you're a young couple, you'll want to know that a house will be available for you in a reasonable time, that there will be schools for your children, technical colleges and universities for them to go to after that. That there will be new hospitals and a good Health Service, that there will be a job in an expanding economy. And if you're retired there will be increasing pensions growing with the prosperity of the country.
All this is part of a modern Britain. And the decision which the nation will have to make on polling day is this. Which party can best get on with the job of creating the modern Britain which we all want to see? I have absolutely no doubt about the answer.
The whole of my political life has been based on the belief that it is the Conservatives who can best do this. Our achievements are here for you to see. Our programmes can do this in the future. Our prosperity of course must be based on our industry, an industry which is modern, re-equipped using automation and the latest mechanical devices. An industry which is well trained making the best use of scientists and with good management. An industry which is competitive. An industry which is competitive will product the goods at prices which will help the housewife and which will secure the exports which are so vital to us. I do not believe that this can be done under Labour Party policy. A policy which is backward looking. A party which is subject to all the pressures of vested interests. A party and a policy which is tied to nationalisation. There are two things which I value above everything. The first is freedom and the second is opportunity. Real freedom to make your own decisions and to plan your lives in your own way, and a genuine opportunity to make to-morrow always better than to-day for yourselves and for your children.

PETER THORNYCROFT:

The decision whether we keep or abandon control over our nuclear weapons is certainly one of the really great issues which we have to decide in this election. It is moreover a decision which once taken will be irrevocable. I speak to you to-night as the Secretary of State for Defence, the man responsible for this field of policy and I am bound to tell you that this is a major issue between the Conservatives on the one hand who wish to keep these weapons and the Socialists and the Liberals upon the other whose firm intention it is to abandon them.
You know if any of you was holding my responsibility this evening as Secretary of State for Defence, and asked yourselves the direct question, should we keep these weapons or abandon them, you would answer - keep them. And that would be the overwhelming answer of the people of this country and that's why the Socialists have covered the whole of this problem with a great deal of what I can only describe as intellectual sludge. They pretend that it won't deter. I must tell you, and I speak of what I know, that one V bomber to-day on a single mission can carry in destructive power more than was carried by the whole of the Royal Air Force in the whole of the last war. Or they pretend that it will bear too heavily on our total cost. It costs less than ten percent of our defence budget at the present time and that cost will progressively decrease. Or it's said that if we could only set an example and cast our own arms away, others would follow suit. I can assure you that if we abandoned them to-morrow it wouldn't have the slightest effect on General De Gaulle or Mao Zhe Dung or anybody else. Or they ask the sort of trick question - when would you strike with this weapon? The answer is that these weapons are not to start war, they are to deter war.
The basic problem of politics is power, not simply military power but power and influence in the world. It is the Conservative's belief that we should use power wisely sensibly and with restraint. Keep it, hold it, even with humility but not cast aside a weapon or abandon our influence before we have played, as we can, our full part in building a more peaceful future for the world.