22nd February 1974

VOICE:

I think the best description of government that I've heard is crisis management, and about sixty percent of government work is responding to situations which are not of your own making. Government is more than simply trying to put into action the promises that are on a piece of paper in a manifesto. They require experience and they also require the confidence of statesmen on an international level. And on those particular grounds I think that the present Conservative Ministers, the team which the Conservatives are fielding at this election, has a record of experience which will be of benefit to the country.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

This election has caused more people to think more about what kind of country this is, and what's at stake, than ever before. And probably nobody is more concerned than the young voter.

GIRL:

This election, like any election, is about getting something done, about getting a party into government with a big enough majority to actually achieve something. And I suppose when one's thinking about how one's going to vote, one thinks about the party which is most likely to get something done, the party most capable of achieving practical results. I shall vote Conservative this time because in my view they are the party most capable of meeting that requirement for me.

I run a youth club, and in my view most young people have a similar requirement from a government. They're fed up with talk, they're fed up with politicians, just sitting round discussing it, they want to get something done.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

How far do you think the Conservative Party reflects the needs of young people?

GIRL:

Yes in terms of actually the ability to achieve something I think it does mirror that need. Obviously elections are about the future, they are about the next few years, I think this election is about the next fifty years. But one has to look at the record, and one has to be practical about this, who is most likely to achieve what I want to see achieved, what young people want to see achieved. And in my view, yes, I do think the Conservative Party reflects this. Obviously one can never do enough, there's never going to be a time when one can sit back and say, right that's it, we're finished. There's so much hardship in the world, but on the whole, yes I think the Conservative Party does reflect that need.

ROBERT CARR:

This election has been about the kind of country we are going to be. And I think everybody realised it, particularly the young, not surprisingly because they are going to have to live their lives in it, for a long time ahead. It's made everybody think about what they want and what they believe in. It's made them more involved, and I don't see how that can be anything but a good thing. It's too easy to leave things to other people and then blame them when you don't like the outcome. I suppose I went into politics in the first place for that sort of reason.

You get to a point when you realise that left to its own devices, society isn't in a natural state of balance, and if some people aren't to be in a permanent down, somebody has to pitch in and do something for them, and if that's the case why shouldn't it be you. We don't think in terms of things like democracy, you take that for granted and thank heaven you still can. You want to see your country work better as a whole country. It doesn't much matter whether you call it one nation or the fair society, you can't have that united society while the most needy part of the community is left out in the cold.

The question is how do you actually do it. At that stage you don't think about political parties, certainly when I was young I didn't know what I was. But when I came to the practical point of choosing and seeing who could do actually what, it seemed to me that the Conservatives represented a kind of mainstream. They seemed to embrace more different groups in society and because of that they have a better all-round view of the world and what could be done about it. They were practical politicians and reformers - uncluttered by dogma. It seemed then, and it seems now, to be the best vehicle for people who want to get things done. You see I don't think it's enough for politicians to say they care, we all care about people. What matters is what you can actually do for them. Idealism by itself isn't enough, it doesn't feed the people, it doesn't protect people.

I became a Conservative all those years ago because I thought they were concerned and also because I thought they were competent and I'm still a Conservative for the same reasons today. We make our mistakes, we get it wrong from time to time, but I do believe we get things done. Perhaps we make the mistake of not saying enough about what we do. We've done more for the pensioners, the first party to look at pensions every year, now every six months to make sure they keep ahead of the cost of living. Pensions for the over eighties, special benefits for the chronically sick and the disabled. All these for the first time. We've done more for the lower paid, family income supplements, freehold agreements, a whole new tax credit system, in fact a whole incomes policy, carefully planned to help them the most. And there are two-million families who under our Act received rent rebates in both council and privately rented houses and flats. And all of these things are happening for the first time.

ROBERT CARR:

We've looked for new areas of need, and we've tackled them where we've found them. Now I know it's not always the way people think about us and that's a pity, but if you look at the record you'll find that there have been more innovations, more changes under a party called a Conservative Party than with anyone else. I do believe we are a Party of change, and we're not fighting yesterday's battles. We believe that everyone should be free to find his own place to stand just as long as he respects everyone else's right to do the same. I suppose we believe in constant evolution and not sudden revolution, and I suppose that's really why our Party seems to be able to appeal to people of all ages and from all classes. I'd like you to think about what I've said when you vote because I do believe this is the most important election we have any of us faced. When I look at Labour I see a great party, but for the moment a party divided and uncertain in where they are going, but uncertainty in today's world adds up to weakness.

Can we afford weakness? When I look at the Liberals I see a different choice. In fact a man stopped me in the street the other day and put it into perspective. He said to me, I'm a genuine don't know, why shouldn't I vote Liberal? And it's not an easy question. Conservatives and Liberals after all are not such different people, we both want to do many of the same kinds of things for this country. I suppose I could have said to him, they don't have the experience of government, which is an accident of history, but still a fact of life. I could have asked him do you really think this is the time to experiment? I could just have said that a Conservative government would look after the whole community with fairness and govern with strength and determination. I could have said that in my view we are the party that best represents the needs of this country today. But what I actually said was, you should vote Conservative because we need a government that can govern. And I say the same thing to you tonight - if you want to get things done give us a Conservative government that can govern. Ask yourself this about the party you're thinking of voting for. Is it strong? Is it united? Does it care? Could it do the job? Does it have the leaders? Would the world respect it? Vote Conservative - it must be the right thing to do.
