9th April 1997

Synopsis
The broadcast consists of 10 'talking heads' filmed in generally gloomy settings, such as an underground car-park and a desolate housing estate. The talking heads are linked by captions on a blank screen. The opening caption reads,
Imagine if the polls were right. Imagine if Labour won the election...

The linking captions are:
After one year of Labour government ... After two years of Labour government ...
Obviously, these are not real people, they are actors with scripts, and some attempt has been made to make them representative in terms of gender, age and ethnicity.
YOUNG WHITE WOMAN:

She said you don't know what it's like being under a Labour government. You haven't experienced it, you're too young to remember and you know obviously that was true, but I just thought well you know nobody believes their mother do they? I want to see it for myself basically and, well, I certainly have. It's affected me personally much more than I would have expected ...erm... I mean for example [inaudible] talk about unemployment figures, well it's just numbers, it doesn't mean anything to you but when you actually - when I actually lost my job a few weeks ago because I was made redundant ...erm... then it's a whole different story

YOUNG WHITE WOMAN 2:
It was a difficult decision because I voted Tory before I thought they really had learned their lesson the Labour party ...erm... the Tories had that slogan ...erm... Britain's booming don't let Labour mess it up and I thought you know they won't do that, Blair won't do that ...erm... but they have.

YOUNG BLACK MAN:
Things were nice and calm, I mean how much damage can you do eh? Interest rates have gone up, unemployment is rising, I'm having to pay an extra thirty or forty pounds a week because of them.
YOUNG WHITE MAN:
Yeah, well, they had their chance and they made a complete mess of it. Me mortgage has gone through the roof, and they put tax up almost straight after they got in, when they promised they wouldn't. You know. Don't worry, they said, we're different now. I suppose it was our fault for trusting them in the first place. Basically we're back in recession, ain't we?

MIDDLE AGED SOUTH ASIAN WOMAN:
My son is looking for a job for all the year, now he can't get one because of minimum wage. Nobody can afford to take him on. I don't know how long he'll have to wait.

MIDDLE AGED WHITE MAN:
Well democracy you know - the Tories had had their day, we thought maybe somebody else. See what they've done, I mean it's just been a total downhill, total downhill, for three years. But what gets to me you see is I went for it, we all went for it, we thought you know a change equals something better. Of course it wasn't [inaudible] something heck of a lot worse.

MIDDLE AGED WHITE MAN 2:
We voted Labour and you know like most people we thought fresh blood you know ...er... we believed all that stuff about government running out of steam and sleaze, and well it seems the further we get into the Labour term the more it was just change for change sake you know. Look at us now, I mean we weren't badly informed, we most of us, we you know read decent newspapers and we kept up with the news, but I mean we knew about we knew about ...er... the great state the economy was in, and we knew about government's record on employment and inflation and all that, but we knew it, but I suppose we didn't value it.

WHITE WOMAN WITH CHILD:
Every time you open the newspaper there's more bad news. Things going wrong every time I go to the shop, prices gone up again, inflation's just going through the roof.

WHITE MAN IN THIRTIES:
[inaudible] had a good job, had a low mortgage, and then inflation was low and I was stupid enough to vote Blair. Those were the good days, now I never thought I'd say that.
YOUNG WHITE WOMAN 2:
I'm here in the future. I know what it's like. Don't do this to Britain that's my advice

CAPTION:

BRITAIN IS BOOMING
DON'T LET LABOUR RUIN IT