21st March 1966

IAIN MACLEOD:

In the studio Mr. Heath, leader of the Conservative Party. Peter Walker, front-bench spokesman on economic affairs - and myself. And the themes - the last ten days of the general election, and the future of young people in this country. And on that, Peter Walker:

PETER WALKER:

Many young people were attracted by the promises that Labour made at the last election. There were those young couples who were saving up to buy a home - they were attracted by the promises of cheaper homes. There were those young couples who were already repaying their mortgages, and they were very attracted by the promises of cheaper mortgages. And then, of course, there were the slogans of the campaign. Do you remember them? Slogans like "Get the country moving"; "Let's Go with Labour." And all the emphasis on technology. These slogans, these promises, were all designed to attract the votes of the young people, and they succeeded. Many young people did vote Labour. Don't you think that these young people have been let down? What of the cheaper homes now? Last year the price of homes in this country rose by a greater amount than in any previous year. And as to Mr. George Brown's three percent mortgages - we all know that we don't have three percent mortgages. They're now six and three-quarter percent, and there's talk of them going up still further - to seven and a quarter percent. And what of the slogan "Get Britain moving"? Not much movement as far as production is concerned. We've had twelve months of stagnant production. And what of technology? Do you remember that speech of Harold Wilson, the speech in which he talked about the Brain Drain, and he said: "We want those of you who have left Britain to think about coming back, because the Britain that is going to be is going to need you."

What would these people come back to today? To higher mortgages; to higher rates; to higher taxation; to rising prices. Not the type of Britain to attract the young, the energetic, the skilled and the technologists. Harold Wilson hasn't stopped the Brain Drain he's speeded it up. We want to retain the young and the energetic of this country. We know that the one way to do that is to see that people can own more and earn more. Our policies are designed to encourage ownership and to encourage earnings. We will see that everybody will enjoy either tax relief or rebate on their mortgage repayments and that young people saving to buy a home will receive a cash grant towards their deposit. We'll see that greater tax incentives are given to savings, and we'll also see that people are encouraged to earn more. And you know there's only one way of doing that, and that's by lowering taxation. The last Labour Government was a government of higher taxation. This Labour Government, now coming to an end, has increased taxation. In thirteen years of a Conservative Government, in nine out of fourteen budgets, we lowered taxation. We've done it before and we'll do it again.

IAIN MACLEOD:

Yes, we can do it and we can pay for it. Now how? There's, one argument that's common to every general election that I can recall - the traditional dispute between the Conservative and the Labour parties on the cost of their programmes. Last time, Mr. Maudling, Mr. Callaghan, this time myself and Mr. Callaghan. As far as we're concerned I don't ask you to decide between us this time - we can't prove it yet, but I can show you a flashback to what happened over the identical argument in October 1964 which is now part of history. Because, just before the last election Mr. Maudling predicted that the cost of the Labour Government's programme would mean increases in petrol tax, beer duty, income tax, cigarettes, whisky and National Insurance contributions. Mr. Callaghan got very cross. Mr. Callaghan said: " Infant school stuff. Nursery school stuff. Hardly worth serious attention. These figures of Mr. Maudling are getting screwier and screwier."

Well it was pretty tough talk wasn't it? But you know, quite apart from Labour breaking so many promises in so many fields, Mr. Maudling in his estimates was proved right. Now just look: Mr. Maudling said that petrol would go up by sixpence, and petrol went up sixpence. Mr. Maudling said that the beer duty would go up by a penny, and the beer duty went up by a penny. Mr. Maudling said that income tax would go up by ninepence; it only went up by sixpence, but on the other hand, Mr. Maudling said that cigarettes would go up by fourpence a packet and they went up sixpence a packet, and he said that the whisky duty would go up by three shillings and indeed it went up by four shillings - and that's the rising price of socialism. In other words, we were right before, and we are right now. You know, there's little to be said for a Minister of Transport who can't drive, but there's nothing at all to be said for a Chancellor of the Exchequer who can't add up.

And now, the last full week of the general election campaign. The issues, the challenges. Here is the leader of the Conservative Party, Mr. Heath.

EDWARD HEATH:

This election ought to be about the future, about your future, but it's impossible to get the Socialists to talk about it. They dare not face the future. Over the past seventeen months the present Labour Government has stood truth on its head. They said they would get Britain moving again. In fact, when they took over we were expanding fast. Yet over the past year the output of industry has not risen at all. It is stagnant. We have had rising prices. Well, you all know that too well. But no rise in production. Do you want prices to go on shooting up under a Labour Government? Or would you rather see a Conservative Government really slowing down the rise in prices - as we did before? I got the act through parliament which stopped price fixing in the shops.

That's the sort of thing we would aim at everywhere. Cutting costs in industry; propping up the nationalised industries; cutting out the waste in the government machine. It's the only way to get prices down and it's the only way to sell more exports. If we really want to stop the rise in prices, if we really want to make this country more efficient, then you know as well as I do that something has got to be done about the trade unions.

That is another of the big issues at this election. Our policy is to pass a new Industrial Relations Act, bringing the whole trade union Movement up to date. The Labour Party does nothing: which do you think is right? Our first responsibility must always be to the old, and to the sick and to the lonely. We've worked out plans for giving them more help and mere care. Do you agree with us that as the country grows richer the extra money should be concentrated on those who've got the greatest needs? Or do you agree with the Socialists who want to spend the extra money thinly everywhere? They want to give it to the rich, just as much as to those in need. Like the prescription charges. Of course it was very popular at first to take them off, but it doesn't make sense to give free medicines to everybody, however big their incomes at the same time as the government are cutting it back on the hospital services, aren't we right?

You know, I get angry with the Socialists when they say one thing and mean another. Particularly in the case of Europe and the Common Market. They say they are keen to join, but only on certain conditions. Of course, there must be special arrangements for us but the Socialist conditions mean that under a Labour Government Britain could never, never hope to become a member of the Common Market. The decision whether we go into Europe or stay out is far too important for that sort of double talk. It's a decision that is going to affect the whole future of this country. We believe that a united Europe has a great and inspiring future ahead of it, and we believe that Britain, as a part of Europe, with its industry on the same scale as American industry, can be far more prosperous. That is why you should decide at this election that you want to go into Europe.

Well, to sum up, these are the issues - the issues you have to decide. We will get the economy straight. They won't. We will reform the trade unions. They won't. We believe in bringing the Welfare State up to date - they don't. They aren't getting the houses built. We will. They won't be able to lead Britain into Europe - we shall.