7th February 1974

HEATH:

As many of you will have heard already Her Majesty the Queen agreed today to my request that parliament should be dissolved. As a result there will now be a general election on February the twenty-eighth. The issue before you is a simple one. As a country we face grave problems at home and abroad. Do you want a strong government which has clear authority for the future to take the decisions which will be needed ? Do you want parliament and the elected government to continue to fight strenuously against inflation? Or do you want a government which will abandon the struggle against rising prices under pressure from one particular powerful group of workers ?

Big changes have been taking place in the world outside. I am thinking particularly of what has been happening about the supply and the price of oil. If the negotiations for peace in the Middle East go well, we can hope that oil supplies will go back to normal. But the price is four times as high as before. The problems that creates are enormous for us, as they are for every other country in the western world, the developing countries as well as the industrialised countries. Prices of the food and other raw materials which we import from the rest of the world have also gone up very sharply in the last year. So what is happening elsewhere outside our control is creating big new problems for us here in Britain. If we look a little further ahead, the view is not so gloomy. If you look at our energy prospects, they are better than most people's. We have a great coal industry, despite everything that is happening now. We have nuclear skills equal to any in the world and from next year we shall have steadily increasing supplies of oil from the North Sea. And so if we don't allow ourselves to be deluded, if we understand and accept the realities of our situation, if we tackle our problems with resolution, with courage and with moderation, and if we tackle our problems together, we have a bright future to look forward to. But for that we need a government which can look to the future and provide the firm and fair leadership which the country needs. That is what I and my colleagues offer you today.

Some weeks ago many people were telling me that we should have called an election then. I believed, and I still believe, that that would have been wrong. I was quite sure it was our duty to put all our energies and all our patience into trying to find a solution to the miners' dispute. That is what we have been doing. We were asked to treat the miners as a special case and we did so right from the very beginning. The terms of our Stage III code were drawn up with just that particularly in mind. The sixteen and a half percent they can get from the Coal Board's offer is far more than the increases already accepted as fair by more than six million other trades unionists. We do believe the miners are a special case. No argument about it. We have demonstrated it not just with words, but with deeds, by investing many hundreds of millions of pounds in the future of mining, by putting money into pensions for miners' sickness benefits and modernisation of the pits by stopping the long rundown of the mining industry once and for all. We told the Mineworkers' Union that we were ready to work out immediately with them and with the Coal Board what the future structure of pay and benefits in the industry should be. Alas - the miners' leaders did not respond. We were asked - I was asked in particular by the Leader of the Opposition - to see if we could use the new report on relative pay to see whether the miners might be entitled to more compared with other industries. We offered to do so. I told the miners' loaders that. Again they did not respond. They refused to discuss what the Relativities Report might have to offer. Nevertheless, we thought it right to keep working along this line. It is the only line on which a fair settlement can be found, the sort of examination of the miners' claim which we have proposed.

So I have now asked Mr Whitelaw to set up immediately standing arrangement for the examination of major relativity claims. This will be based on the existing machinery of the Pay Board. As its first task this new machinery will conduct a full examination of the miners' case. This examination will be conducted in accordance with the principles of the Relativities Report. It will take account of the relative claims of other groups, many of whom such as nurses and teachers gave evidence during the preparation of the report. It will be completely free to take evidence from any quarter and to decide upon its recommendations. So it will be impartial. It will be thorough. It will be fair - not only to the miners but to every one else. And it will work as fast as is consistent with being fair. We don't want it to feel that it has to hurry and skimp its work in order to meet a particular date so the government is prepared to undertake that whatever recommendation the new body makes on the miners' case can be back dated to the first of March. Then in due course when the recommendations are known, we shall need to take account of what they mean for the future development of our policies for dealing with inflation. I have therefore asked the mineworkers' leaders to call off their strike during the campaign. I am glad to hear that the President of the National Union of Mineworkers has agreed to recommend to his Executive Committee tomorrow that they should agree to do so.

Now, I know a lot of people have been asking : What will an election prove ? The answer is this: an election gives you the people a chance to say to the miners and to everyone else who wields similar power in Britain "Times are hard. We are all in the same boat and if you sink us now we will all drown." Once you have said that, then the government you elect will be in a far stronger position to reach a settlement with the miners which safeguards your interests as well as theirs. Your vote will indicate who you trust to see you through the difficult years ahead. As you know, we have a policy that gives a special place to the pensioner, to the lower paid and to those who like the miners do dangerous and disagreeable jobs. That is the fair way. The alternative is to let everybody fend for himself and we have all seen what happens in that situation. The strongest wins as he always does and the weakest go to the wall. That is the unfair way and we will have no part in it.

So the issues are very clear. A strong government to deal with our problems at home and abroad; new strength to our arm in the fight against inflation. There is something else which I must add. There are some people involved in the mining dispute who have made it clear that what they want is to bring down the elected government, not just this government but any government. They have made it clear they want to change our whole democratic way of life. You've seen them on television and I have seen them in action at first hand. The great majority of you are fed up to the teeth with them and with the disruption that they cause. The election gives you the chance to make it clear to these people how you feel. I think they will find that to try to take advantage of the British people when times are hard is not well advised, let them be reminded of this through your vote in three weeks' time. I said we were living in a difficult, even dangerous, world. I can't promise you single solutions or easy answers; no party can honestly promise you that. But only one thing can threaten our future; that is our continued tragic record of industrial strife. We cannot afford the luxury of tearing ourselves apart any more. This time the strife has got to stop. Only you can stop it. It is time for you to speak with your vote. It is time for your voice to be heard - the voice of the moderate and reasonable people of Britain, the voice of the majority. It is time for you to say to the extremists, the militants, and to the plain and simple misguided: "We have had enough. There is a lot to be done - for heaven's sake let's get on with it." That is the true and familiar voice of Britain. The voice of moderation and courage. That is how it has spoken in those times in our history when the country has faced great problems. That voice now has the, chance to speak once more, to speak loud and clear.