15th June 1970

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY (VOICE OVER):

Cold, aloof, distant. These were the kind of words the press were always ready to trot out about Ted Heath. But as the election got into its stride they began to use them less. Heath was a man come to life and clearly enjoying himself. Even enjoying the ever-present camera, the back-slapping, the hand-shaking. The public had never seen the private man in quite this way before and they liked what they saw. Someone said, "He's a man you can trust."
He's won that trust the long way, and the hard way. Few politicians have travelled more widely, or prepared more thoroughly for leadership.

His interest in politics started early, when he was a scholarship boy at Oxford. He's very much the product of his age - a self-made man with no inherited money or special position, but a great deal of ambition for his country.

When the election was called he'd bean waiting for six years. A girl taking a census at Glasgow Airport asked him has occupation. "Temporarily unemployed," he answered. His ultimate destination: 10 Downing Street.

The campaign hasn't always been to his taste. His opponents have evaded every issue. But he's refused to be distracted, he feels people have a right to choose on the basis of the facts and he's been determined to air them. If his views seem familiar it's because he's held them consistently and they're founded in commonsense. Certainly his experience as Cabinet Minister and European negotiator has stood him in good stead. As a colleague remarked: "Ted will make the best equipped Prime Minister this country's had."

EDWARD HEATH:

And when our institutions and principles are challenged, particularly by the younger generation today, then we must either show that those principles are sound and those institutions sufficient, or we must be prepared to change and adapt them to modern needs.

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY (VOICE OVER):

A man who feels passion may distrust it, perhaps this is why the public Heath has rarely managed to convey the convictions he so easily expresses in private. He doesn't believe that a leader need necessarily be an entertainer as well. But, as the months have gone by audiences have seen more of the private man - the real man. They saw it in January when his boat 'Morning Cloud' won the Sydney to Hobart, one of the world's four toughest races. "I see no point in competing," he said, "unless you're determined to win."
And winning was something he was used to. To be the first elected leader of the Conservative Party was no small achievement and he soon gathered round him a team which combined youth and experience, and would look ahead.

But to a man trained to look ahead the election campaign has often been frustrating. The sun was shining and the opposition was pretending that winter would never come. Heath felt differently, he could see the same signs of economic trouble that he had predicted so accurately in 1966.

But the opinion polls seemed to show that people were prepared to close their eyes and hope it would go away. Heath confided to a colleague: "I don't want to be the one to say I told you so again." And then, as the days shortened, his message began to get through. Or perhaps it's the quality of the man that's begun to get through. People have begun to realise that this isn't just another politician talking, and he's felt the change, too. Hardened newspapermen have been heard to remark that this is a new Ted Heath. It's not a new Ted Heath, it's the one who's been there all the time.

Perhaps he's not an easy man to know - but when they know him people feel he's a man worth knowing - a man to trust.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH (VOICE OVER):

A Man to Trust - the Leader of the Conservative Party, EDWARD HEATH.

EDWARD HEATH:

It's funny how the odd phrase sticks in your mind long after the more important things are forgotten. I well remember being driven down to the boat for the start of the Sydney-Hobart Race. There was a bright blue sky, with the sun beating down over that glorious harbour and I said to the young Australian driver: "What confidence there is here. What's it all about?" And without batting an eyelid he said: "well, you see, everyone here knows that tomorrow will be better than today." Those were his very words. "Tomorrow will be better than today."
Nobody in this country would say that - not these days. And yet, why not? Why should anybody have to think of leaving this country which we love to be able to look forward to a better tomorrow? What's happened to us? You and I live in this country for one simple reason - we happen to think that it's still the greatest country in the world, and yet slowly but surely that world is passing us by. And I don't like it. We may be a small island but we're not small people. We shouldn't think of ourselves like that and we shouldn't encourage other people to do so either. What I find hard to take is the way that for the last six years the government of this country has done just that. They've let us be treated as second rate. They even plan for us to stay second rate, because that's what Labour policies mean. Do you think we should settle for second rate? Do you think we should settle for losing? Do you think we should settle for standing still, while everyone else goes past? I think you should enter a race to win.

There's something very sad about Labour's view of life. They seem to think it's natural for life to be hard. They think there's merit in having to tighten our belts all the time. They even seem to think there's something wrong with people being better off. But they're the people who are wrong. If you do more, why shouldn't you be better off? What's wrong with this country being prosperous?

Prosperity is a kind of freedom in its own way. It's freedom to live in your own house; it's freedom to have some of the things you want around you, to bring up your children and give them some of the things you never had yourself. It's freedom to do what you want to do in your own way, without prosperity you can't have choice. And a country that has lost the power to choose can't choose the kind of country it wants to be. Now I don't intend to stand by and see that happen, because I am very clear about what kind of country this is. It's a great country and anyone who doubts it does so at their peril. It's a free country, where a man has always been able to walk in safety and speak his mind in peace. And what matters most - it's one country for all of us to share. And I will never see it any other way. I believe a man has the right to be proud, and free and to seek happiness in his own way. I believe it is the duty of government to give him that security, that choice, and I have devoted my life to that belief.

But a country is no more and no less than its people and they have a duty, too. The late President Kennedy expressed this in words that I could never equal. "Ask not what your country can do for you," he said, "but what you can do for your country." Well one thing you can do and must do is to choose the kind of country you want us to be: what kind of country and what kind of people to run that country. You can settle for the way things are today, but you can aim for what you'd like to see tomorrow. Now is the time to take a long cool think. It's worth remembering that you're not voting for today but for the kind of life you want for this country for the next five years. It's for you to choose. Do you want the worry of the last five years all over again? Or do you want a better tomorrow? Because that's what I believe in. That's what I stand for. That's what I will work for with all my strength and with all my heart. I give you my word, and I will keep my word.

VOICE OVER:

How you vote is your business, and only your business. It doesn't take a moment, or cost you anything, but with the wrong decision you could have quite a price to pay.
