Conservative 19.2.74

VOICE:

If you're thinking of voting Labour - think about this. Honestly now, which Labour Party do you think you're voting for? When you vote on February the twenty eighth you have a choice to make. The Labour Party want you to choose them but how do you know which Labour Party to choose? And how much choice do Labour have? Take nationalisation. For years it's been a dirty word, a bit of dead dogma. But suddenly the party machine slips out of gear. Even Jim Callaghan admits the Labour Party is moving to the left, and suddenly they want to take over your insurance policy, your bank account, your mortgage, your pay packet. You name it - a million or more people could find themselves working for the State, and it wouldn't take much more of a move to the left and you could find yourself not even owning your own home.

That's the real price of Labour. They're playing a game with other people's lives. But however much Labour likes to dodge the issue, the real problem is inflation. The biggest threat this country's faced in time of peace. While a Conservative Government has built up a pay and prices policy to protect us, what would Labour do? Take away our only hope - a policy that most people in this country now feel is a necessary defence, and put in its place - what? Another solemn and binding undertaking? What real alternative do Labour offer? Even Roy Jenkins admits they have no simple solution and in a Labour Party Broadcast only last Friday Shirley Williams confirmed they could do nothing about prices. In other words, they'll think of something - later.

VOICE:

But if you happen to be one of the eight million pensioners, the three million lower paid, the sick, the weak, or any of those who've been helped by a Conservative government, later could be too late.

VOICE 2:

But of course the real reason why Labour won't have an incomes policy is that Labour can't have an incomes policy. The trade unions pay the Labour Party's bills and their left-wingers' answer is simple - nothing doing, no way. Finally, when you're considering Labour's policies, as you should, consider what these men have said about the kind of Britain they want to see.

McGAHEY (READ):

"It's not negotiation in Downing Street that we want. It's agitation in the streets of the country, to remove the Government."

COLLINS (READ):


"I'm out to make Britain a Communist State and if it means acting against the law, so be it."

VOICE:

And then consider what this man has to say:

RAMELSON (READ):

"The party can float an idea early in the year and it can become official Labour Party policy by the autumn. "

VOICE:

And he should know, because Bert Ramelson is the party's industrial organiser, and the party is the Communist Party.

ANTHONY BARBER:

What is at stake in this election makes it, without doubt, by far the most important that any of us have seen in our lifetime, and I'll tell you why. Britain is a democracy and what that means quite simply is that we abide by the will of the majority as expressed by parliament. But now, in recent weeks, we've seen all too clearly certain men, who if they got their way, would put an end to all that. These men reckon that they've now got the power to create so much chaos that they can make the British government, and so the British people, do just what they went. And this is the crucial issue which has got to be decided, and decided by you. What this election is going to decide is just what sort of a society we want here in Britain - whether we're going to stick to the tradition that parliament decides things or whether we're going to allow the industrial force of a minority to take over what happens to our country.

You see, when Mr McGahey, the Communist Vice- President of the Mineworkers' Union, when he said that only massive industrial action can defeat the Tory Government, when he said that he knew that in order to succeed he and his Communist friends had to achieve two things. They first had to force a general election - and the fact is, you know, and it may as well be admitted, that the action which they advocated has forced a general election - but the second thing they had to do to succeed in their Communist aims - as they frankly stated - was to replace the Conservative government with a Labour government - a Labour government that would be putty in their hands.

And if you doubt that, remember that over these past few weeks the Labour party has resolutely refused to make the slightest attempt to persuade the Mineworkers' Union to stop the industrial disruption. And why? Because, like Mr McGahey, they hope that it might succeed in defeating the policy of the elected government. Twice the Prime Minister has urged Mr Wilson to support the government in asking the miners to call off their strike during the election and twice Mr Wilson has refused. Remember that, and ask yourself why he refused.

As Chancellor of the Exchequer there are really two aspects of the Labour party's policy which worry me deeply and I hope you'll understand when I say, with the experience which any Chancellor gets at the Treasury, that I know what the consequences would be and I'll tell you. In the first place the Labour Party are pledged to a big increase in government expenditure. All right, there may be some argument about the actual amount but it's agreed on all sides that it would be a substantial increase, over and above existing plans. Now the one thing that is absolutely certain is that Labour's programme would be bound to mean higher taxation and it would be you who would have to pay for it. There simply is no other way.

The second aspect is what I must tell you I consider to be the appallingly irresponsible pledge of the Labour Party, to abolish - to abolish altogether - all control over incomes. Now, a pay free-for-all, at this particular time, would make it quite impossible to get a grip on inflation. Mr Wilson has now come up with the idea of what he calls a new social contract, but you know he tried all this before and it failed before. And, anyway, did you hear Mr Scanlon on television last night? I know Mr Scanlon and he's certainly a straight talker. What he said, last night was absolutely clear. He said that there's no real agreement between the T.U.C. and the Labour Party - so that's that. I can tell you one thing: if we were now to abandon all control over pay, at this of all times, prices would just go through the roof. And it would be the elderly, the pensioners and all those who haven't got powerful unions to back them, these are the people who would go to the wall. And think very hard also about what I said earlier. The stability of our parliamentary institutions, our political maturity - these you know are admired and respected the world over - and this is why, this is why people all over the world are waiting for the result next week. They're waiting to see whether our parliamentary democracy - the oldest in the world - is going to stand up to the test. Britain is the best country in the world to live in. It's a free country. A democratic country. It's a country which is run by the properly elected government and by no-one else. Let's keep it that way.