?th June 1970

VOICE OVER:

Last night Mr Heath spoke in Birmingham, one of his themes was care and compassion. And that's the theme of tonight's edition of A Better Tomorrow.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

We're hearing a lot about care in this election. Mr Wilson calls it compassion, and you'd think he'd invented the word. But just how much does Mr Wilson's caring count?

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY:

The fact is that today after five years of Labour government the poor are getting poorer, things are actually getting worse. Two million families are living in sub-standard conditions, yet this year fewer homes are being built than when Labour took over.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

As for people on pension, well Labour meant well. When they came to office, they put pensions up by four shillings in the pound.

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY:

The only trouble was that in the next five years prices rose faster than pensions. In January this year the Child Poverty Action Group reported that "In many ways, the plight of poor families is now worse than when the government took office." And the chairman of that was a Labour party adviser.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

Now Mr Wilson is fond of saying how much he has spent on the social services. But he includes some strange things in what he calls spending.

CHRISTOPHER CHATAWAY:

For instance, he counts the record fifty million pounds he's given to the unemployed. But then he's helped create a record amount of unemployment. Over five hundred thousand are out of work at this moment.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

Whichever way you look at it, far from improving, things are actually getting worse. And the people who suffer most and who suffer first are the old people. The people on a pension. Robin Balneald (?) is the Conservative spokesman on social services.

ROBIN BALNEALD [?]:

You know when I talk to old people the thing which they tell me they fear most is that as they get older they won't be able to make ends meet. They feel that life will kill them faster than disease. What is needed is the development of care services - home helps, meals on wheels, good neighbourhood schemes, voluntary service. You know there're one and a half million people living entirely alone and there're two and a half million people, elderly people, suffering from malnutrition. And what astonishes me is that Labour has allowed this calamitous collapse of the housing programme when there're one and a half million old people who are living in houses which lack two of the three basic amenities - that's a bath, a kitchen, a lavatory. This hidden Britain of the old and the poor - they're usually people who are too proud to complain. They can't fight back. A Conservative government will concentrate housing resources to help the deprived, and we'll concentrate social resources to help those in need, and we'll restore the economy because the first victims - those in the front line of rising prices - are the old and the unfortunate and the weak. What angers me is the arrogance of a claim of the Labour party to have a monopoly of compassion. They debase the word compassion by making it an issue of party politics. Well I care and Ted cares. Indeed I believe we all entered politics because we cared for the people of this country.

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

The poor get poorer, and that is the price of Labour compassion. We'll be back in a minute.

OLD WOMAN:

If I [inaudible] granted a wish well that would be good health, if I had good health I wouldn't be lonely.

OLD WOMAN 2:

You get very lonely not having anyone to talk to, you know it gets very monotonous being on your own all the time.

OLD MAN:

I don't like to be dependent on anybody.

OLD WOMAN:

I mean I don't expect other people to bury me.

VOICE OVER:

Misery is the cost of living in Labour's compassionate society. It's quite a price to pay.
Since Mr Wilson came to power this is what he has done to your pound. Going at the same rate 1971 would be like this - fourteen shillings and three; 1972 - thirteen and a penny; 1973 - twelve shillings; 1974 - eleven shillings; 1975 - ten shillings. The ten bob pound - only your vote can stop him.

VOICES:

What about the cost of living? What about unemployment? What about the old folk? What about income tax? What about strikes?

VOICE OVER:

This is the deafening silence of Mr Wilson. Why is it that a man who is so good at asking questions is so bad at answering them?

GEOFFREY JOHNSON SMITH:

In a moment we'll be hearing from Mr Maudling, the deputy leader of the Conservative party. But first a few words from people who've been on the receiving end of Labour's care and compassion.

OLD WOMAN 1:

Well I've got erm a little electric fire in the hall, and it costs me twenty eight shillings a week, if I can keep it on, yes, for warmth. And what I have to do I have to go to bed early with a hot-water bottle and save, save the [inaudible].

OLD MAN 1:

Well what he's done to the old age pensioners, it's criminal because even in in the last budget he said prices wouldn't ... will be stabilise, yet right after the budget we get a rise in bread, coal, gas and electricity.

OLD WOMAN 2:

We're ... we're very much er constricted, very much indeed.

OLD WOMAN 3:

You have to go from shop to shop looking for something cheaper all the time.

OLD WOMAN 4:

We're struggling - you know it's a struggle to live.

OLD WOMAN 5:

Well I don't think that the Labour government has really done much for us - really at my age we've seen quite a bit haven't we? - a few governments, and really I think this is the worst batch of all.

OLD WOMAN 6:

And of course I think this is such such a bad thing because this problem is like the er starving - if you wait long enough it's gone because they've died off.

OLD WOMAN 7:

It's very unfair, the government's forgotten about people like us, really they have

REGINALD MAUDLING:

And is it really surprising if they do feel forgotten? So many of their hopes were raised and so many have been bitterly disappointed. Well what is the reason? Quite simply it's happened because for the last five years the Labour government have made a mess of running this country. It's not a question of who cares about these problems - of course all parties care, that's why we're in politics to try and serve our fellow man - but it's not enough just to care about people's worries and their sorrows. You must be able to help them in practice. For compassion is of little value without competence.

I don't accuse Mr Wilson of being heartless, but under him the poor have grown relatively poorer. It's not by his wish I'm sure, but so many children are still living in families below the poverty line. I'm sure he and his colleagues wanted to help, but the simple fact is that Labour has let them down. But how are we to put things right? First of course more money must be found. And this can be done only if our national income rises faster than it has done in recent years. We must get back to the kind of growth we enjoyed before Labour took charge. And then so much could be done to help. And this means a return to Conservative policies and Conservative government. And then we really must put first things first.

We must see to it that the help we can make available goes to those whose need is greatest - and this is what we intend to do: we'll concentrate on clearing the slums, we will work with all our hearts at the real problems of the old and the lonely, the problems that need not only money but care as well. The needs of the chronic sick and the disabled. The just claims of the public service pensioners, pensions for those over eighty who have no pensions at all, the problems of children living in families so near the poverty line. These are the tasks on which we intend to concentrate, and this is the real job a government must do. It's a job profoundly worth doing. It's a purpose worthy of all our efforts. But it can be accomplished only by a party that can combine competence with its compassion.