15th February 1974

DENIS HEALEY:
Prices - they've come smack into the middle of the election with a bang tonight. The news you've just been hearing about last month's price increases means your cost of living will go up twenty-five per cent this year if you send the Conservatives back. The average family in Britain is already spending ten pounds a week more today for the same amount of goods than when Mr Heath got in and by this time next year it will be twenty pounds a week, that's a thousand pounds a year in price increases, if you let him in again.

MAN 1 :
People on the streets, the people who are voting, they are not worried about the miners. What they are worried about is the pound in the pocket and the money it's doing for them. It's got no value.

MAN 2:
If more emphasis was based on price restrictions, then wages wouldn't have to go up you know, it might even mean a subsidy by the government, it could mean more taxation.

MAN 3:
Yesterday I went shopping with the wife and items which were, two items, one was eighteen p last Thursday, yesterday it's twenty-five p.

WOMAN 1:
I've been in a shop this morning, yesterday I went in the same shop and it were...it were seven and a half p for a tin of tomatoes. They've gone to ten p, they were doing them like that as we walked in this morning, that's in a day's time.

WOMAN 2:
You try and plan a week ahead but next week the prices are completely different from the ones you budgeted for last week so it's impossible to deal with them intelligently.

MAN 4:
I had a pensioner come in this morning and she wanted a bar of household soap, I said: sorry it's up twopence on last time. She says: My mother always used to say to me that poverty was no excuse for being dirty but I've got second thoughts about it now. Oh it's a ridiculous situation. It's costing me a fortune in new price tickets every week just re-marking everything.

SHIRLEY WILLIAMS:
I'm standing beside two shopping baskets. One that was bought in 1970, the other in 1974. In 1970, an ordinary shopping basket full of the items that we buy every week cost five pounds thirty seven. Exactly the same items bought in 1974 cost eight pounds. And let's take some of these items. Bread, standard white loaf. In 1970, you could buy it for nine pence. Today, it costs no less than fifteen pence, the three shilling loaf is here. Take a dozen eggs. In 1970, you could buy a dozen eggs for nineteen pence for twelve. Nowadays, it costs you nearly forty, sometimes a little bit more. Take New Zealand cheddar cheese. You could buy a pound of this cheese for nineteen pence in 1970. Today, it will cost you thirty-three pence. And last of all, that precious item that is fast disappearing, an English roast beef on Sunday. Three pounds of topside is what I am holding, would have cost you one-pound-twenty in 1970. Today, it will cost you two pounds ten. The Conservatives say: Don't blame us for this massive increase in prices. It's not our fault. World prices have risen. There's some truth in that. World wheat prices for example jumped from fifty pounds a ton to a hundred and seven pounds today. But it's by no means the whole truth. The increase in the profits of flour millers and bread makers, over the last year, has been as much as seventeen and twenty per cent. That means that extra costs go on your loaf of bread.

Take another example: cheese. In 1972 New Zealand knew that we were going to join the European Economic Community, the Common Market, so what they did was to find other customers. They sent their cheese to Japan and to other countries and the price of cheese soared in that year because New Zealand knew that we were joining the Common Market.

Take beef. The price to farmers at auctions has actually fallen, in the past year. But have you seen the price in the butchers' shops fall to cover that? Of course not.

And, finally, take eggs. The government says it's all due to the cost of feed going up. Again, there's some truth in that. What they don't tell you is that the profits of one of the biggest companies in egg production rose by more than double last year. Eastwoods declared a profit of more than double what it had been the year before.

Now you may say what can Labour do about it? And I'll give you the answers. We can't control the world food prices. Of course we can't. What we can do is to subsidise the absolute essentials. Things like eggs, like bread, like cheese that loom large in the diet of the ordinary family and of the old age pensioner with very limited money.

We secondly believe that those large profits, and those are the kinds of profits that companies have been declaring in the past year at a time when wages have been pegged down to seven per cent, that those large profits ought to be pegged back and that that can be done by a government with the political will.

And thirdly we believe that we ought to re-negotiate the Common Market Agricultural Policy so that the British housewife, so that you, can gain the benefit of lower food prices abroad. These are the things that Labour will do. We can't promise to cut prices at a stroke, but if you elect us we will do everything in our power to prevent food jumping in price and other prices in the way that happened between 1970 and 1974.

HEALEY:
Food prices are only part of it. Rents have gone up even more and house prices have doubled. And mortgage payments are nearly three times higher. Now Mr Heath can't blame the floods in China for that and it's not those Reds under his bed either. The guilty men are sitting round him in Number Ten Downing Street because the main responsibility for inflation in Britain today lies with the Conservative Government itself and the disastrous policies it has followed both at home and abroad.

VOICE:
What about the Common Market?

WOMAN 3:
Well it's ...

MAN 5:
He's dragged us into the Common Market, because of that we are paying exorbitant prices for our food.

MAN 6:
Now he's in trouble he wants us to help him out.

MAN 7:
He knocked Labour for devaluing and what's he done with it? He floated it and it's gone whew, what's it worth? About fourpence now ain't it?

MAN 8:
Everything you could possibly think of he's handled he's spoiled.

MAN 9:
If he gets back in again I'm thinking of emigrating.
HEALEY:
I don't often agree with Mr Enoch Powell, but he's right on one thing. The Conservative Government itself is largely responsible for this terrifying increase in our cost of living. Mr Barber financed his tax hand-outs to his wealthy supporters simply by printing money. So prices went up, the pound went down and within three years he'd turned that thousand-million Labour surplus on our balance of payments into a deficit which was running at two-thousand-five-hundred-million pounds even before the oil crisis and long before the present industrial dispute. That devaluation by itself is responsible for nearly half the increase in our import prices since Mr Barber sent the pound floating about eighteen months ago. The continuous foreign pressure on the pound has led Mr Barber to insist on Britain having the highest interest rates in the world.

So, the average couple can't afford a mortgage and the building societies don't know where to turn and house building is now grinding to a halt. And then on top of all this there is the Common Market. Mr Heath has accepted their instructions to put taxes on the cheap food we could be getting from the Commonwealth and to increase those taxes year by year. And those Common Market bureaucrats have saddled us with the appalling nonsense of the Value Added Tax which is already sending thousands of small shop-keepers and businessmen frantic with extra work and worry.

And those same bureaucrats have already instructed Mr Heath in the next two years to raise the Value Added Tax by half and to put VAT on food as well. Now these are all things a British Government could change if it wants to. We can run our finances honestly, though it will mean a tough year or two to get things straight. We can re-negotiate Mr Heath's terms for entry to the Common Market or we can get out altogether if we don't get what we want. We can stop the rent increases due in two months time and, as far as the Labour party is concerned, we will. We can't do it at a stroke and there are some things which no British Government could do very much about. But I promise that the next Labour Government will do everything a government can do to keep the cost down. We've tried tonight to show you some of the things which can and must be done. Whether we get the chance to do them depends on you.
