19th March 1992

NEIL KINNOCK:

We live in a country rich in heritage, in natural resources, and of course most of all rich in the quality of the people. But when you know that the potential is not being used properly it really makes you ask what's happened in these last years? Why has life become so bleak, narrow, insecure for so many of our people? Why is a country that has so much ability to do well not doing better? We've go to see a Britain that makes the most of people's vitality, people's creativity. We've got to ensure that every man and woman, every child gets the chance to bring out the best in themselves. That means making real changes to improve child-care, schools, hospitals, training. It means making basic changes to get jobs, to build houses, and see the streets are clean and safe. That's the kind of change people want. Everybody knows it. It's time for that change now.

JOHN SMITH:

Labour's economic policy starts from one simple common sense fact: the only way to build a strong economy is to make the goods and services that people at home and abroad want to buy. That's how to bring down unemployment, that's how to create the wealth to pay for a top class National Health Service and higher living standards. That's how it's done in Germany, Japan and other successful economies. It's time to pull Britain out of recession and to start to build a strong and a prosperous economy.

GORDON BROWN:

For more than a century Made in Britain has been the guarantee of quality right across the world. But now as British manufacturing declines it's becoming harder and harder to buy British. It's time that Made in Britain becomes the basis of economic success again. To manufacture much more that's made here we'll start by introducing immediate incentives for industrial investment that will help lift us out of recession and lay the foundations for a British prosperity that lasts.

TONY BLAIR:

And it's time to make Britain the best educated and trained nation in Europe, raising school standards by cutting class sizes, making sure every teacher is qualified in the subject they teach, getting every company to invest in training and giving all young people the opportunity to learn a skill. A workforce of quality - that is the way a modern economy succeeds, where you, your children, everyone can develop their potential to the full.

MARGARET BECKETT:

It's time Britain's families got a better deal. Labour will start by investing at least an extra billion pounds in the National Health Service over the next two years as well as an extra six hundred million in our schools. We'll help working mothers by giving tax relief on employer assisted child care and increasing nursery places for three and four year olds. We'll increase child benefit by one hundred and twenty seven pounds a year for a family with two children. We'll raise pensions by an extra eight pounds a week for a couple, five pounds a week for a single person and we'll abolish the poll tax - the tax on families. Under Labour's budget proposals eight out of ten families will be better off. Labour will put families first and about time too.

ROBIN COOK:

If you elect a Labour government we'll end the privatisation of the National Health Service and we'll bring back the hospitals that opted out. We'll modernise our hospitals and we'll start by investing at least an extra billion pounds. Labour created the National Health Service. We need Labour now to save it. It's time for a strong National Health Service - one that we can all rely on. It is our right.

ANN TAYLOR:

It's about time we improved the quality of all our lives. That's why we will make sure that every local community gets first rate local services and why we are committed to a safer Britain with more police officers on the beat and a transport system we can rely on. And we must improve our environment, cut down on air pollution, ensure our rights to safe drinking water. We'll set up an independent green watch dog to cut pollution, clean up our rivers and beaches, anticipating future problems to make Britain and our world a cleaner safer place in which to live.

SMITH:

And can we afford this? Well, as the economy starts to grow again there will be more money to invest. That money must be invested in our industrial base, in our hospitals and schools, and in our social services. A Labour government will introduce a fair system of tax and national insurance. More money needs to be raised to help pay for much needed increases in retirement pensions and in child benefit. We will introduce a new top rate of tax at fifty percent which will apply to incomes over forty thousand pounds per year, and the unfair upper limit on national insurance contributions will be removed. But our reforms of tax allowances and of national insurance will mean that every tax payer with an income of up to twenty two thousand pounds a year will pay less than now and seven hundred and forty thousand tax payers will be taken out of paying tax completely. And of course families with children and pensioners will gain more. Labour's tax reforms, unlike those proposed by the Conservatives, will not be paid for by borrowed money.

BLAIR:

It's time for a Britain where the best values count again.

ANN TAYLOR:

And it's time for a leader whose values are the values of the British people.

KINNOCK:

I've worked to ensure that Labour is forward looking and fit to provide good government for our country. Now I know that we have the talented people and the practical policies needed to deal effectively with the challenges and with the opportunities of the 1990s. This country has enormous strengths. We've got some of the world's best companies and most committed workforces, some of the greatest scientists and inventors, some of the most outstanding artists and sports people. By electing Labour you'll be electing a government to build on those strengths, you'll be electing a government that really believes in Britain and the people of Britain, a government that will invest in Britain and the British people. It's time for a new leader in our country - it's time for a new government with people of energy and vision to bring out the best in Britain. That means making real changes to improve child care, schools, hospitals, training. It means making basic changes to get jobs, to build houses and see the streets are clean and safe. That's the kind of change people want. Everybody knows it. It's time for a change. It's time for Labour.