25th February 1974

VOICE :
The next Labour government will be a team. They were in charge in the days when our trade figures were kept out of the red and when Britain was working full-time. Labour men and women understand down-to-earth problems. They share experience, skill and a genuine concern to bring back good sensible government to all the people. Together they can put us back on the road to recovery as a united country.

ROY JENKINS:
The mood of the country is worried; it is also thoughtful and anxious not merely to criticise but to find a way out. I believe that Labour has a way out. We did it before. We can do it again.

MICHAEL FOOT :
If the Common Market had nothing to do with increased food prices, Pompidou would never have let us in. He let us in precisely because he knew that under the arrangements that Heath was signing, British housewives would have to pay to sustain the high prices fixed by the farmers in Europe.

EDWARD SHORT:
The idea is that we create social justice or a great more social justice than we have got in Britain at the present time by controlling prices - food subsidies and a great many other things, increasing pensions, and so on.

JAMES CALLAGHAN:
I have yet to meet the trades unionist or the manager in industry who has any confidence in Mr Heath's handling of industrial affairs and if by any mischance he were re-elected and went on like he has been, there'll be more extremists in this country in five years time than there are now.

TONY CROSLAND:
I think it is perfectly reasonable to say that a one year freeze on rents after the very large increases of the last two or 
three years will be an essential contribution to get an anti-inflationary policy.

TONY BENN:
In fact, over the last year of the so-called counter-inflation policy, real wages have actually fallen. Profits have gone up sixteen percent. Dividends have gone up twenty eight percent and the net asset value of the property companies has gone up twenty percent. The chancellor gave three hundred million pounds in last year's budget to those over five thousand pounds a year and the Child Poverty Action Group tell us there are ten million people living on, near, or just above the poverty level.

SHIRLEY WlLLIAMS:
We believe that we ought to re-negotiate the Common Market agricultural policy so that the British housewife - so that you - can gain the benefit of lower food prices abroad. These are the things that Labour will do.

DENIS HEALEY:
We can run our finances honestly, though it will mean a tough year or two to get things straight. We can re-negotiate Mr Heath's terms for entry to the Common Market. Or we can get out altogether if we don't get what we want. We can stop the rent increases due in two month's time and as far as the Labour Party is concerned, we will.

HAROLD WILSON:
That is the Labour team. Between them they share over forty years' experience as government Ministers. They were among the men and women who got Britain out of the mess last time and whatever the difficulties, we will do it again. On Thursday it is for you to decide whether we are to return to the sanity and stability of Labour's years in office, working as a united people, whether we are to get Britain back to work again, or whether we are to carry on along the road of bitterness and division at home and bankruptcy abroad. How should you decide? What are the factors you should weigh in making your choice?

You might start by comparing the records of the Labour and Conservative governments. Six years under Labour: three and a half under the Conservatives. The average rise in prices when we were in office was about four pence in the pound each year. Under this present government prises rose by twelve pence in the pound last year. Everyone says they will go up by at least fifteen pence this year. Last year the number of houses built in Britain was the lowest since 1959 - one hundred and twenty thousand fewer than in the corresponding year of the Labour government. Mortgage rates have gone through the roof. Council house rents forced up year by year. There has been a total collapse of the housing programme.

Strikes: the number of working days lost through industrial disputes under this government has been running at a rate four times higher than when we had a Labour government. Not only did Labour rebuild the strength of Britain when it governed from 1964 to 1970, it is the only party today which has put forward a programme to stop our present slide to disaster. A programme for recovery not for further decline. We did it before. We can do it again, though it will be tough going. We are determined to introduce strict price controls in the shops, profiteers will risk prosecution. We intend to subsidise those essential foods which bear heaviest on the family's weekly spending. We will cancel the council rent increases due in April and October this year as well as those private rents due to go up under the Housing Finance Act provisions. We will stop the speculative scramble for money in the City of London, which has sent mortgage interest payments soaring to their present crippling heights. Together with our plans to take all building land into public ownership and out of the hands of the speculators, these measures amount to a real, a radical, a relevant attack on rising prices. Make no mistake about it: that attack is absolutely vital to Britain's recovery. The rate of price rises forecast for 1974, even by Conservative commentators, would demolish the security, devastate the savings and threaten the stability of our national life.

The Conservatives ask you to give them another chance. But they have no intention of changing their policies which have brought Britain to its present peril. Another chance in those circumstances, would mean another chance for them to make matters even worse. We do not promise to cut prices at a stroke or by any other instant method. It cannot be done. But the attack on inflation must start right away. At the same time immediate help must be given to those in greatest need and that is why it will be a first priority of the Labour government to raise the old age pension to ten pounds for a single person and sixteen pounds for a married couple. We've got to return to co-operation not conflict in industry, to the politics of consent and conciliation, not fighting and confrontation; prices are the key now not wages.

Higher prices force up wage demands, provoke strikes. In a free democratic country you can't have legal control over wages for very long and you can't do it twice. It creates manifest unfairness. It creates intolerable problems and strikes. So this attack on inflation has to be an attack on prices. Only the well-off - you know - can protect themselves against inflation. The broad mass of the British people are hit by it and they are hit hard. Trades unionists are people, employers are people. We can't go on setting one against the other except at the cost of damage to the nation itself. And yet conflict was the basis an which this election was called and the government want you to join them in totally, unnecessary civil strife, tearing ourselves apart while Britain's basic underlying problems remain unsolved. Problems incidentally grimly emphasised again this afternoon by the appalling trade figures: the figure for January alone (one month) nearly as bad as that for the whole of 1964, and 1964 was the worst ever until then.

What the Conservatives want is quite simple - your vote so that they can continue to rule the nation and divide the nation. But your vote for Labour can do so much more. It can end this wretched period of darkness and the three day week - but it can do even more than that. It can give us back our sense of fairness and direction. This country after Thursday can once again begin to assert itself. We can once again become the envy of the world for our unity and our moderation and our commonsense. It is the time now for decision; the arguments are nearly over. Now it is up to the British people. Don't let them talk you out of it. The decision is yours.
