18th February 1974

VOICE:
Some groups deserve fairer wages for the jobs they do and when they have to fight for them they're called extremists. Others with extremely high salaries don't even have to ask for more. Last week the Chairman of Rank's announced his own pay rise - an extra two hundred pounds a week. His new annual salary - sixty-five thousand pounds. Sir John Stratton of Fatstock Marketing: last year higher meat prices helped raise his income by forty-three per cent to fifty-three thousand pounds. Harry Hyams is in property: the price of land goes up so fast nobody knows how much he's worth. The value of Centre Point is about forty million pounds. It's empty - like other office blocks throughout the country. The slums aren't empty. New housing is at its lowest in years. Just like the pound. Dustmen, teachers, hospital workers, engineers, bus-drivers, postmen - and now the miners - have all been blamed. Since control of wages it's becoming harder to put all the blame on the workers. So now it's world prices and extremists. But how do the Tories explain this in crisis Britain? For the rich, Tory controls have meant rising profits and keeping tax concessions worth five hundred million pounds. For the rest of us, rising prices. That's fairness for you.

ROY JENKINS:
In 1970 I ended my election broadcast by saying we've managed to remain a remarkable island of tolerance and civilised living in an increasingly disrupted world. We have a position of strength from which we can maintain and improve these benefits and speak for the new influence. Both these statements were true then. They're no longer so. Observers from abroad were then coming to see what was right with Britain. Now they're coming to see what's wrong. Mr Heath can't deny that: it is he who has raised the question of vote for me or the end of ordered government. The question is false but the fact that it can be raised at all is a heavy indictment of the way he has conducted our affairs. In 1970 there was no question of the nation being ungovernable. If things have got so much worse since then whose responsibility is that?

And for the moment our economic strength has gone, too. That mounting surplus and secure pound has been turned into a huge unprecedented deficit of three thousand million a year and a sinking pound. This isn't because of the oil crisis: this deficit was there at the end of 1973, there before the oil increases began to bite. It means that we're weak to face this new problem. Meanwhile, here at home, we see what real financial mismanagement means: banking profits soar, while the building societies are bereft of finance and housing hopes die, and inflation mounts from ten to fifteen per cent a year. With so much bad news on the way I'm not surprised that Mr Barber, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, was one of the moat determined advocates of an early election. He knows the sombre prospect which his frivolous stewardship has created. The mood of the country is worried: it is thoughtful and anxious not merely to criticise but to find a way out. I believe that Labour has a way out. We did it before, we can do it again. The position is serious but it's not unmanageable. It is not remotely as daunting an that of 1945. Then indeed we were up against it but as a result of five years of war, not of three years of chasing after false gods. The fundamental mistake has been the view that if individuals were encouraged to think primarily of themselves the country would prosper and benefit. Mr Heath proclaimed one nation but practised the policies of selfishness. This was the era of lame ducks, judging the whole quality of a man's life by his success or failure in making money and making tax handouts, particularly for the better off, the central purpose of government.

It didn't work. It produced the mess we are in today. A few people - especially the property speculators - gained enormously. Meanwhile we've moved close to breakdown in the public services: the schools, the hospitals, public transport - and above all housing, particularly in the big cities. This each-for-himself approach didn't merely not work, didn't deserve to work, for it was based on a narrow, out-dated view of society. Anyone today who thinks he can have a worthwhile and secure future on the basis of saying to hell with everyone else is not only a knave but a fool. The nation tears itself apart: the economy plunges into crisis and we all face a threat to jobs, businesses, pay-packets, our hopes for ourselves and our children. Britain won't be put right unless this is recognised. If it is recognised then we could overcome our problems and surprise the world, as we have quite often done before, by the rapidity of our revival. That revival can be made the stronger by the big prospective bonus of North Sea oil, but only if in the next four or five years we can sustain the big investment necessary to make the oil flow, and only too, if we make sure that the nation gets its proper share of the rewards and not allow them to be pocketed by non-tax paying oil companies. That means a major switch to our policy. We also need a high degree of public control to prevent this new industrial revolution from leaving upon our land a legacy of physical scars like those of its predecessor a hundred years ago. This is part of the major problem of civilised living in the future, How we can maintain and advance the amenities of life in the midst of the monstrosities of modern industrial society. Unless we're careful we may find ourselves rich in goods but rich without purpose, for the countryside will be engulfed, the coastline destroyed, the rivers polluted, the atmosphere made hideous with noise, the cities blighted and our lives both at work and at home racked with pressures and tensions.

We must stop the wasteful rapacity of too many motorways eating up homes and unnecessary airports destroying village communities. We must resist the property developers putting offices before housing and tearing the heart out of the towns. We must create a Britain for people to live in, not a concrete jungle. Just as nobody in Britain will find salvation by thinking only of his own problems, so Britain must not forget the world outside. We must not forget the two-thirds of the world's inhabitants who are hungry every day of their lives. We must not forget how dependent we are, both for our peace and our prosperity on what happens beyond this island. If we try to contract out the world won't go away, it is much more likely to hit us in the face, just when we are least expecting it. Let us not therefore ignore these longer term issues. Let us not be ashamed of a little idealism. Hard materialism hasn't served us very well. We are voting not just for next month: not just on the fluctuating ploys of a snap campaign, we are voting for four or five years ahead, on how we want to see Britain developed during this period and beyond. We need a new start with a message of honesty, justice and hope.
