16th June 1970

HAROLD WILSON:

It has been like this all over the country. People everywhere are feeling a new confidence. They are confident because their efforts have produced solid results. Results of which everyone is proud. Confident and determined. They realise that no Prime Minister in this century has fought an election against such a background of economic strength as we have got today. They are determined that this strength should be used to benefit all our people. They are not going to let anyone take it away from them or talk them out of it. The Tories have tried to distract you by whipping up one issue after another. The South African cricket tour. The curious intervention of Lord Cromer. The pay claim of the eighty pound a week doctors. Last week the newspaper strike. Quickly ended by Downing Street intervention followed by T.U.C. action. And last week, too, Mr. Heath invented a new one, a so-called economic crisis. Yesterday he avidly seized on the trade figures. Two jumbo jets imported, costing eighteen millions, swelling the import figure. But Mr Maudling last night agreed - I quote his words 'it's about the strongest balance of payments in the world.' The Conservatives thought they could win this election by giving the impression of sweeping, wide-ranging cuts in taxation while at the same time holding out promise after promise to spend more on everything they thought would gain them votes.

The one thing they didn't allow for was the good sense of the British people who know that spending more and taxing less don't add up. That you cannot spend more out of taxation and raise less in taxation. You cannot get something for nothing. No wonder they have been so evasive about their financial plans. There's one thing clear. If the Tories were let loose on the nation's finances, our economic strength would soon ebb away. Their whole campaign is based on exploiting rising prices. But everyone knows that the cost of living in Britain is lower than almost any other country in Europe or North America. They know that Conservative policies would pretty quickly put an end to that. Because Conservative policies are deliberately designed to raise prices. To raise food prices by abolishing the food subsidies which protect the housewife and imposing levies - food taxes - on the food we buy from abroad. To raise almost all other prices by their Value Added Sales Tax. To raise rents, by getting rid of our present system of housing subsidies. By ending the protection which Labour's Acts of Parliament give to the householder in the face of rising council house rents. They would scrap all the controls we operate to restrain price increases. But that is not all. The best way to keep prices down is to make industry more efficient. That is what the Labour Government are doing. Modernising our older industries and saving them from bankruptcy; steel, shipyards. Building up new industries, computers, with which we are challenging the world. The Conservatives have made it clear that they would scrap all we are doing. Just as they have said that they would cut down sharply on the hundreds of millions we are spending to bring jobs that are needed in the development areas and other parts of Britain.

Every election is a choice. The nation made its choice in 1964 when we called the people to a great venture, a great transformation of Britain. In the first years we had to put all our efforts into getting the country strong because without a strong economic basis you cannot do what you set out to do. We are proud of what has been achieved. But economic strength is not an end in itself. It is only a necessary means to an end. The socialism I believe in, means above all using all our resources for making Britain a better place to live in.

For a Labour government this means sharing prosperity in a way which is fair and just. It means ensuring that our old people are cared for as they should be; that poverty, whatever its cause, is rooted out. It means providing decent homes for families. Housing is an issue in this election. It is an issue because the government insists it is an issue. It will never cease to be an issue while there is one family poorly housed, while there is one slum street in our big cities. It means caring for the sick. And that includes the mentally handicapped. It means helping and protecting ordinary people against the harsh impact of economic change. It means, above all, accepting that individual misfortune is not just a private concern but a community concern. We are all members one of another.

Even when Britain was up against it, so much was achieved. We strengthened the social services, health and education as never before. We can now make faster progress because we are strong. Even this is not enough; it means a deliberate effort by our generation to prepare the way; to give more freedom and more choice for the young people of today and tomorrow. We have to prepare for the changing Britain and the changing world in which our children are growing up. We must be ready to invest in their future. Better education and equality of opportunity. End the eleven-plus by a system of comprehensive education which extends to every child the educational opportunities which in the past were available only to a few.

But this means spending more on education. It's a question of priorities. This is the first government which is spending more on our children's education than on armaments and defence. It means, too, training our young people in the skills which are required for the new industries. It means a much better chance for our young executives in industry. Because what we have done is to reform and modernise industry on the basis of greater equality. Compared with six years ago, more top jobs are going on the basis of professional qualifications, not of family connections, school connections. Now industry itself is proud of the fact that more young people from ordinary families are coming to the top.

And again because we are concerned with the future, we must see to it that we develop as one community; that the rights and opportunities that we want for ourselves are not denied to minorities, whether they be religious minorities in Northern Ireland, or racial minorities in our big cities and towns. This is the kind of Britain we want. A great country, tolerant and compassionate; respected, today, not for its imperial power, but for the way in which we live, our ideals, the causes we fight for, the values for which we stand. A great country, admired and respected throughout the world because it combines stability with change. Great because we have broken the bonds of poverty and privilege and of class. These are the assets we hold in common, assets built up in six years of shared endeavour and experience. As we hold in common our compassion and our concern. This is the moment where we have to decide whether we are prepared to build on our success. What is at stake this week is our future, our children's future. The choice has to be made. Too vital a choice for anyone to stand aside. We have made it our country - all of us - a country to work for. Above all in the choice that has to be made on Thursday.