22nd March 1966

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

You know Labour Government works! Manifesto of the Labour party, General Election, 1966. Time for Decision.  The Family in the new Welfare State. Heath and Welfare Services. The Minister of Health.

KENNETH ROBINSON:

The Tories were always against a free Health Service. They've now promised to bring back prescription charges. They say they'll raise thirty million pounds a year doing this and on their proposals, that would mean a prescription charge, not of the two shillings we got rid of but more like four or five shillings per item. And let's be quite clear about this. The nation's drug bill has to be paid for. The only question is do you want to share the cost over the whole community or should you pay individually when you're sick and least able to afford it, as the Tories propose? And who's going to decide who pays, and who doesn't? Your overworked doctor or the chemist or perhaps one of these proposed Tory Inspectors of Welfare? Under the Conservatives, who never really believed in it from Nye Bevan's day onwards, the National Health Service was steadily running downhill. Not enough doctors, too few hospitals, nurses driven to march in protest. In seventeen months, we've coped with the family doctor crisis largely created and wholly ignored by the Tories. This year we'll be spending half as much again as the Tories on new hospital building. They cut the intake of medical students and we are expanding it by the equivalent of three new medical schools. Even with the highest priority, a Labour Government cannot, in seventeen months, make good the neglect of a dozen years. But give us a five-year Parliament and we'll have a Health Service we can really be proud of.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Full employment. Richard Marsh.

RICHARD MARSH:

Jim Callaghan has twice asked the Tory leaders if they would create unemployment in order to keep wage levels down. It's a simple question but as far as I know, they just won't tell. Labour Government is the only government which has coped with an economic crisis without creating unemployment. The Tory answer, every time, has been to throw men and women out of work or to reduce them to short time, and worse still, they left thousands of our youngsters out of work when they finished school - unemployed before they even started work. And it didn't end there. Industry in this country is changing rapidly. New technologies are springing up, old industries are dying, and men who'd worked ten, twenty or thirty years in an industry suddenly found themselves redundant and often with only a week's notice. It really was monstrous that we had to wait for a Labour Government to do something about this because in all their thirteen years, the Tories did nothing. Now the Redundancy Payments Act brings relief to a man coping with what is, for him, a terrible crisis and often in the prime of his life. The Labour Government did a great deal more than this. It so developed the government training schemes that a man like this can acquire a new skill. You see, once men in this position, and they're proud of their skills, suddenly found they were not wanted unless it was for sweeping floors or making tea in factories, and now they can acquire new skills. They can make a new contribution to our society and keep their dignity. It was left to Labour to do these things and they did it in seventeen months. You can't trust the Tories to do a job like this.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Social security. The Minister of Pensions speaking in Edinburgh.

MARGARET HERBISON:

The Tories intend to abandon the Welfare State. That is what the Tory Sunday Telegraph says. It is now plain that what they want to see is the Means Test nation, and to do this they have promised to appoint a lot of new inspectors. In the last general election, the Labour Party promised help for those in need - the old, the sick and the disabled. We have done all that, and we did it speedily. The new Ministry of Social Security will do more. It is bold, imaginative, and will meet people's needs. From Labour we have had action and not only words. The Tories are now talking of compulsory occupational pensions. It sounds well enough but take a closer look. They haven't said how much, and they haven't said when. Today, over half the occupational pensions are less than two pounds per week, and even that sum takes forty years to accrue. And they take no account of rising prices. And what is more, they take no account of widows. Must people really wait till the next century before they get an adequate pension? The Tories seem to think they should. The Labour Government will create a fair and just scheme for everyone now, not in the twenty-first century. Our scheme will give retirement on half-pay, and build-in safeguard against any rise in prices. The Labour Government created the Welfare State. The Tories mean to destroy it. This is one of the fundamental differences between the parties. You must judge for yourself The decision is yours.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Fair rents and mortgages. The Minister of Housing.

RICHARD CROSSMAN:

The Conservatives have said it. They're going to dismantle our new rent control wherever they decide it's unnecessary. As you know, one of the first things I did as Minister of Housing was to annul the Tory Rent Act of '57, restore security of tenure to eight hundred thousand homes and then I set up machinery for rent control and for fixing fair rents. The Opposition didn't vote against us in the Commons and the control is now operating very well in London and parts of the Midlands. But before we can even set it up in the rest of the country, Mr Heath announces he'll get rid of it wherever he likes. It might be a good idea to ask your local Conservative candidate whether yours is one of the districts where his party leader would set the landlords free. And while you're at it, you might go on to ask him whether he supports or opposes the new rate rebates for two million hard-pressed ratepayers which come into force next week. Or our new plan to reduce the interest rate for one and a quarter million of the least well-off of our owner-occupiers. Then, just a word to the council house tenant. When we took over, we found a desperate shortage of decent homes at rents the average wage-owner could afford, and we launched a huge housing drive to put it right. Because I wanted the councils to build a lot of houses without forcing up the rents too high, I increased the basic subsidy I inherited from my predecessor from a paltry twenty-four pounds a house to sixty-seven pounds a house.

And now what do the Tories say? Well, only today Mr Heath told us in a press interview that one of the places he'd economise is subsidies for council housing. And this must mean that if the Tories won, they'd revert to their old scale of subsidies and that would mean the burden on council house rents will be increased by just sixteen and sixpence a week for each new house the Council built. Let's see what all this adds up to. This evening you've heard about four things we've done to help ordinary people. Four things the Tories are just waiting to wreck if only they could win this election. First, we abolished the prescription charges, and the Tories would re-impose them with exemptions which would raise the charges to four shillings an item. Number two, we're going on to make half-pay on retirement as well as half-pay in sickness and unemployment already on the statute book. And, the Tories have said they're determined to dismantle this part of the comprehensive Welfare State and introduce so-called 'selective aid', which would, in fact, put some seven million people on the means test. Number three, council house rents. We're trying to build many more council houses, while calling a halt to soaring rents. And the Tories have said they'll drop our new subsidies and force council-house rents still higher. Fourthly, rent control - we shall restore security of tenure to every tenant in the country, the Conservatives have announced their determination to dismantle it. Here, then, are four things we've done which help, between them, almost everybody in this country. And each of then is under attack by the Conservatives. On Thursday week, you can decide this vital question: were we right, when we kept our promise and helped people in these ways? Or are the Tories right, in threatening to destroy our work?

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Time for decision!