30th March 1992

VOICE (FEMALE):

On Monday March the sixteenth John Smith, Labour's Chancellor of the Exchequer presented his budget to the nation, and to the nation's media a budget for economic recovery.

JOHN SMITH:

We're starting to speak [inaudible] for the ordinary tax payer, the average family.

VOICE (MALE):

On Wednesday March the eighteenth Neil Kinnock launched Labour's manifesto - its emphasis on getting Britain working again.

KINNOCK: [inaudible] that they experienced in the face of wartime.

VOICE (MALE 2):

At its heart a programme of urgent measures to get Britain out of recession and build economic recovery. A programme of investment in Britain's future.

VOICE (F):

On Monday the twenty third of March Neil Kinnock and Gordon Brown in Birmingham launched Labour's manufacturing manifesto.

GORDON BROWN:

British er manufacturing not only needs low interest rates low inflation and exchange rate stability ...

VOICE (M):

A programme for industrial revival - a revival now all the more desperately needed as business confidence falls, investment declines and unemployment rises.

BROWN:

And we have seen the biggest loss in manufacturing employment of any country in the European community.

VOICE (SCOTTISH MALE):

Fife. For centuries a great coal producing area. In Scotland as a whole since 1979 unemployment has risen by over ninety thousand.

VOICE (LIVERPOOL MALE):

Merseyside. Since March 1990 over fourteen thousand more have joined the unemployed - now fourteen and a half percent of the workforce. The small businesses that survive are struggling.

VOICE (F):

The Midlands.

VOICE (BIRMINGHAM MALE):

Two thousand one hundred and ninety business failures in the West Midlands in the last year alone. Every vacancy now has thirty three people chasing it.

VOICE (F):

In the last year one hundred and seventy thousand jobs were lost in the West Midlands - forty percent of them in engineering

VOICE (BIRMINGHAM MALE):

Here British Leyland once made trucks.

VOICE (F):

Medium sized businesses demoralised.

VOICE ( SCOTTISH MALE):

Small businesses: over fifty thousand have gone under in the last twelve months.

VOICE (F):

London: the once prosperous south-east.

VOICE (M SCOTTISH):

In greater London in the last two years over eleven thousand firms collapsed and unemployment rose by over two hundred thousand.

KINNOCK:

Britain is suffering the longest recession for sixty years. But there is a way out of it. We can and we must take effective action to get the economy working again. At the heart of our manifesto is our strategy for national economic recovery. That programme will combat unemployment and recession straight away and in the very act of doing that we'll be building firm foundations for a British economy that stays strong and successful. We've got the policies to give Britain a fresh start and we've got the people to make those policies work.

JOHN SMITH:

The budget we presented to the British people is first of all a budget for economic recovery. The key to economic recovery is investment. Labour will act immediately with a one billion pound economic recovery programme of investment in housing and transport, jobs and skills. We'll offer new tax incentives to help firms invest in manufacturing industry. Our economic recovery programme will get Britain out of recession this year. But it will do more. The investment we make today will also create growth and jobs next year and in the years that follow. A strong economy needs strong industries. What we need are goods made in Britain, not recessions made in Downing Street. Gordon Brown is Labour's Secretary of State for trade and industry responsible for building a new partnership with business and industry.

GORDON BROWN:

Our budget for recovery will start with a new investment programme for British industry. Manufacturers want to invest. We'll help them to do it. Far too many products from magnetic resonance imaging to the most modern computers are invented in Britain but are now being made abroad. Under Labour British science will have the best incentives in Europe and with our new technology trusts we'll link British businesses with the best brains in our universities. I want Britain to be the industrial leader of the new Europe and I want Made in Britain to be the guarantee of quality right across the world. Enterprising people in Britain should no longer be held back by an unenterprising government. Competitors back their industries. Labour will back British industry so that Made in Britain once again becomes the basis of economic success.

SMITH:

By investing in education and training we will create the modern skills that business needs to succeed in the future. Tony Blair is Labour's Secretary of State for Employment. He will be responsible for Labour's national training strategy.

TONY BLAIR:

Labour's budget for recovery makes higher standards for education and training a top priority. Labour will create a three hundred million pounds skills fund to improve the skills of our workforce. Labour will cut class sizes and make sure that every child has enough books and a properly qualified teacher. We'll give unemployed people the chance either to retrain or to combine work in the community with quality training and job search. We are determined to make Britain the best educated and best trained nation in Europe.

SMITH:

Our budget is good for industry, good for jobs, good for the economy. It's a budget for economic recovery. Margaret Beckett is Labour's Chief Secretary to the Treasury

MARGARET BECKETT:

Labour will invest at least an extra billion pounds in the health service over the next two years. We'll invest at least an extra six hundred million on schools. Labour will help working mothers by giving tax relief on employer assisted child-care and increasing nursery places for three and four year old children. We will raise child benefits by one hundred and twenty seven pounds a year for a family with two children. We'll increase pensions by an extra eight pounds a week for a couple, five pounds a week for a single person, and we'll abolish the poll tax the tax on families. Eight out of ten families will be better off with our budget and everybody earning up to twenty two thousand pounds a year each will pay less tax.

SMITH:

But how are we going to pay for our programme? We'll start with fair taxes by raising personal tax allowances. We'll take seven hundred and forty thousand people out of tax altogether and we'll cut taxes for everyone earning up to twenty two thousand pounds per year, but we believe the ceiling on national insurance contributions is unfair and should be ended. We will also introduce a new tax rate of fifty percent on earnings above forty thousand pounds that will help pay for a better health service and improving our schools as well as increased child benefit and higher pensions. Unlike the Conservatives we won't borrow to pay for tax cuts, we'll borrow to build. Investment in skills and homes, transport and industry, will all pay off by creating new wealth in the future. Our proposals will make eight out of ten families better off. One out of ten families will stay the same and only one in ten will be asked to pay more. I think that's fair. These proposals have three objectives: to make you and your family better off, to invest in modernising our vital public services like transport health and education, and to get Britain out of recession this year.

KINNOCK:

Britain has great strengths. We've some of the best scientists and designers, some of the most successful companies and most committed workforces in the whole world. Now we need a government which builds on those strengths a government that backs British enterprise in the way that governments in our competitor countries back their producers. We must invest in education and training in health care and housing. We've got to invest in industry and innovation to get Britain out of recession. It's time to get Britain working again. It's time for change. It's time for Labour.
