12th June 1970

ROY JENKINS:

At this stage in an election campaign you may begin to feel that you are being deluged with propaganda, and asked to believe either that everything in the country is perfect or that we are on the edge of catastrophe. Now of course neither of these things is true. We have much to be proud of in this country. A great deal has been achieved recently but there is an awful lot still to do. I want to discuss three issues. One, paying our way in the world where we have made tremendous progress and got the problem well under control. Next, the cost of living, where there's a serious worry at the present time. And the third which is the whole question of the sort of country we want to live in in the future.

First, paying our way: the problem which had bedevilled this country for ten years or more past. People abroad began to think there was something wrong with this country and we even began to think so ourselves. It was essential to show that this wasn't so and that we could do at least as well as anyone else. This was vital to our national self-confidence. But there was more to it than that. Unless we were paying our way, we would not have the base on which to expand our standard of living at home or to strengthen our influence for peace and sanity in the world. This vital change, central to everything else, has been achieved on a most impressive scale. We said a surplus of three-hundred million pounds was necessary, and we got one of six hundred and six million. We have been over twice as good as our word. As a result the pound has become a strong currency, and our international debts have been melting away fast. It has been a great national success story, in which the nation as a whole is entitled to take pride, for the nation as a whole has produced the result.

The second issue is that of rising prices, which we have not yet solved, and which has indeed become more acute in recent months. The Tories, I suppose naturally, are trying to exploit this in every possible way. They show you pictures of pound notes being snipped away at with a pair of scissors, ignoring the fact that they cut a good third off its value when they were in office. They suggest it's all the fault of the Labour Government, without beginning to explain why, if this is so, the same thing - or worse - is happening in every industrial country in the world. Of course what they are trying to do is to disguise the fact that their own proposals would have the effect, not of bringing the cost of living down, but of putting it up much faster. They want to switch taxation, and pay for at least part of the change with a Value Added Tax. They have gone quiet about this during this election, but they talked enough about it before for us to know that it is absolutely essential to their plans. What is involved is a new tax, at the rate of at least four shillings in the pound, on a whole range of things which are at present exempt. They would put this tax on such things as coal, gas and electricity bills - on bus and rail fares, on the maintenance and repairs to houses - and on children's clothing. Without doubt, the Tory package would not only put up prices but make the ordinary wage-earner - and the ordinary housewife, worse off.

But dismissing the Tory claims, as I believe you will, you will still want to know what we are going to do about it. And you will want to know what is to happen in this country. It isn't all that much consolation to be told that things are as bad, or worse, in France or Japan or the United States. We must now give as high a priority to steadying prices as we did to the balance of payments in the past two years. We succeeded in that, against most people's expectations. I believe that we can achieve the same success with prices. This means an effective voluntary incomes policy, which we are determined to make work. It means sometimes being prepared, as a government, to say no, as the Tories always want to do in theory but never in practice - witness the doctors. The people of this country are not fools. They want steadier prices, and of course they know that you cannot have this and incomes going through the roof. It means a fair taxation policy. And it means that price exploiters will have to face determined investigation. Mr Heath wants private industry to be left free and to be subject to only a few 'hints' from him. That is simply not good enough, for it won't deal with the cases - and you know they exist - of deliberate exploitation.

But behind these immediate issues of the campaign lie some more fundamental issues. What are the opportunities for the future? First, we must use our new economic strength to get our industry moving forward with greater steadiness and momentum. This is the way, the only way, that we can increase our wealth as a nation more rapidly. We must also get more employment in the less prosperous regions of this country. For the past five years we have been running on the same spot on this problem largely because of the inevitable run-down of coal and other old industries. Only our policies of giving intensive help to these areas - help which is opposed by the Tories - have held the position. Now we can go forward - provided that, as we shall, but as our opponents will not, we keep up the pressure to get prosperity better spread throughout the country. But what are we going to use the additional wealth for ? Of course we want to see individual living standards rising fairly and continuously. We want to see people able to earn more money for themselves. But we must also improve the living standards of those who cannot earn much for themselves - the old, the disabled, the widows, the families oppressed by poverty. We have done a lot in all these directions, but not nearly enough yet.

As the country can afford it we shall do more. We cannot allow our society to remain disfigured by islands of poverty, however small. And we must not forget the poverty overseas either. We cannot live in a closed country today, even if we wanted to, and it is neither right nor sensible to shut our eyes to the fact that two-thirds of the world are always hungry. We also want to improve our community services at home. The standard of living is not just the pay packet, important though that is. It is also the quality of the schools and hospitals, the opportunity to get a decent home, and what exists round the home too, the streets and parks and playgrounds, the pubs, the shops, the social centres. There are still too many waste-lands in our cities. But perhaps the greatest problem of the future is whether we can maintain and advance the amenities of life in the midst of the monstrosities of the modern industrial society. Unless we are careful we may find ourselves rich in goods, but rich without purpose, with the countryside engulfed, the coast-line destroyed, the rivers polluted, the air hideous with noise, the cities blighted and all our lives rent with intolerable pressures and tensions. We need the wealth-producing processes, but we also need a high degree of positive action to civilise and mitigate the barbarities of life in a modern industrial environment. This is one of the biggest gulfs between the two parties. We believe the community must do a lot of the job .... they believe it can mostly be left just to happen. But it won't. We have a great heritage in this country. We have managed to remain a remarkable island of tolerance and civilised living in an increasingly disrupted world. Now we have a position of strength from which we can maintain and improve these benefits. And we can speak with a new influence in the world too. But only you can help us to maintain this advance.