23rd September 1974

MAN:

Teamwork: that's what counts when you're facing trouble as we in Britain are today. That's why it's vital to have a good team at the top, in government. And whether you're a Labour supporter or not, I'm sure you'll agree with me, that Labour has a very good team, a very experienced team of men and women at the top. Take Shirley Williams, battling for your family budgets, she's made no promises about cutting prices at a stroke, but she's saved the average family about sixty-four p a week by subsidising basic foods like bread, butter, milk, cheese and tea. Anthony Crossland inherited an appalling housing situation as environment secretary. In six months he's frozen all rents, pegged mortgages, helped domestic rate payers hardest hit by Tory rate increases, boosted local authority house building which was at an all time low in February. Now he's announced the public ownership of all development land and stopped land and property speculators making obscene profits at your expense. But could I make one thing clear? These proposals do not apply to the homes and gardens of the owner-occupier.

Home Secretary Roy Jenkins has declared a new deal for women to end the discrimination in pay, housing and jobs which has made women second class citizens. Barbara Castle's pensions plan will give women equal treatment for the first time as well as taking the poverty out of old age by making future pension increases inflation proof. She's already paid out the biggest and quickest increase ever in pensions and other benefits for the sick, disabled, unemployed and widowed. National Health staff have not been forgotten either. Their pay rises will help make the Health Service great again.

Dennis Healey our chancellor can boast that Britain is beginning to pay her way in the world again. Our non-oil trade deficit has been slashed by half, and he's reforming taxation. An extra one and a half million people now pay no income tax at all, while tax increases have been concentrated on the well off.

Michael Foot ended the miners' strike and the three day week within days of becoming employment secretary. He scrapped the industrial relations act to the relief of unions and employers alike. He's cleared the decks for good sense and reason to emerge once more in board rooms and on the shop floor.
JAMES CALLAGHAN:

It's a good start to an election when a government goes to the country and is able to say 'We've kept faith with you'. It's good for the government's standing, but it's good for the country too. Because it sustains people's belief in the process of democracy. And there are some now who are trying to undermine that belief. They are the enemies on the extreme right and the extreme left. The Labour government has got a splendid record since February, one of which I'm proud - anyone who tells me politicians don't keep their promises will get a swift sharp reply. So we come to you again with some confidence and we say 'Please give the Labour government a clear majority to keep on with the job'. From what I read none of the other party leaders disputes our view that the principle problems the country has to face are rising prices, costs shooting up, the fear of growing unemployment.

Well, the government is tackling all of these. The new food subsidies have been invaluable to the family. The last election when we were talking about this I met a young housewife who said she didn't understand what food subsidies were - she was too young, she didn't remember the last war - well I think she knows now. And she should also know that they've saved her family with two young children over sixty pence a week on her food bills. Well why didn't the Tories do that when they had the chance? It's the family that needs protection when there's a thin time ahead. We know it's costing the country a lot more to live nowadays, the oil that fuels our industries is costing us four pounds a barrel to import, it was only a pound a year ago. Thank goodness we shall have our own supplies by 1980.

But it isn't only fuel oil. Other commodities have gone up too that we bring in to the country, and the result is this - and I want to put it quite straight - we in this country, over the next year or two, are going to be hard put to it even to maintain our standards of life, never mind improving them. That's why you need a Labour government. To protect you, to make sure that the burden of sacrifice is fairly born, that the broadest shoulders do carry it, that the elderly are looked after, and the sick, and the disabled, and that the worker and his wife and children shall be protected from the ravages of unemployment.

And to be sure we can do this the Labour government needs a clear majority, and not be dependent on the whims of other parties' votes. We've a series of clear-cut policies. They are there to meet the present emergency. But where does the Tory leadership stand? They're all over the shop. Some say one thing, some say another. No wonder the Conservative voter is feeling a bit bothered and bewildered and perhaps a bit downcast. Mr Heath, to whom I never deny the virtue of courage, at least has admitted that he went sadly wrong with his industrial relations and with the three day week. But he hasn't a single new economic idea to put before us. I think he needs a little longer in opposition to think it all out.

As for the Liberals, they baffle me. Their remedy apparently is to go back to the very wage policies that led Mr Heath to disaster and the country to the edge of it. Now, apart from these immediate problems of inflation and unemployment, the most serious longer term aspect in Britain is that other countries continue to move ahead faster than we do. True, we've still got a pretty high standard of life but we are falling behind. We cannot continue as we are. We must make radical changes. So this is what the Labour government proposes. First, a new relationship between government and industry, to revive investment, to increase productivity, and to increase profitability. There must be a partnership in which the government takes more direct interest in raising industry's standards, but to do it without smothering private industry. Next, there are our plans for a more equal and fairer society, one that will protect those in need, and will give a new status to women.

Scotland and Wales will have the opportunity to express themselves more fully through their own elected assemblies, whilst they remain part of the United Kingdom - there's no room for separatist, nationalist party in these tiny islands in this day and age. Britain must decide its role in Europe. When our re-negotiations are complete the government will place the facts in front of you. You will be asked through the ballot box to decide your own future. And this will take place within the next twelve months, if there's a Labour government, not with the Liberals or Conservatives in office. But whatever happens, Britain needs to work closely with other countries, for we cannot solve our problems on our own. Countries, even the very largest, need to cooperate with each other, more and more nowadays. But whatever the difficulties, a Labour government will continue to protect your rent, to try to keep down the price of food, the cost of living, and protect the value of your wages.

Our present situation is uniquely difficult, we shall need everybody's cooperation if we are to succeed. Already the trade unions have given a firm promise to help. I believe they mean what they say. And I, I'm sure, when the election is over, the employers will do the same. So with the government's successful record of the last seven months behind us, with our clear programme for the future in front of us, we ask you, we ask the country, for an uncluttered and unencumbered majority on October the 10th, enable us to get on with the job, and ensure that Britain has a great future.
