27th May 1983

VOICE OVER:

Homelessness, waste, desolation, destruction, vandalism and apathy. These are the consequences of bad social policies and like dominoes the knock-on effect of one bad one is unstoppable. This Tory government has seriously damaged the economy, and this has had a bad effect on everything else. First of all, there's unemployment. We don't apologise for reminding you again that two million more jobs have been lost under the Tories and thirty-four thousand firms have gone bust. Unemployment breeds poverty. By May 1982, six and a half million people were on supplementary benefit. People on the breadline can't afford the basic necessities of life. Prescription charges have gone up from twenty pence, to one pound forty - an increase of six hundred percent. Since 1979, electricity prices have gone up by eighty four percent, and gas by a hundred and fifteen percent. Telephones become luxuries, so two hundred and thirty-seven thousand lines were disconnected in 1982. And of course housing suffers. This Tory government has the worst housing record since the 1920s. Fewer houses were started in 1982 than in any year since 1925. Council rents have doubled. Mortgage payments have gone up by one quarter. There are more than one million homes that have been condemned as unfit for human habitation, with three and a half million people living in them. Two and a half million homes are seriously affected by damp, with all the health risks to those people living in them.

DENZIL DAVIES:

We are faced today in May 1983 with a dire housing crisis, especially in our inner cities. But just as the Labour government of 1945 got down to it and rebuilt our country, so will we when we win the election. We have a positive programme for action and our first priority will be to out people back to work. We will build the factories, we will build the schools, we will build the hospitals that people so desperately need. And our aim also will be to secure a decent home for everyone. So Labour will give local councils the means to build fifty percent more houses. We shall devote substantially increased resources for home improvements and every tenant, council and private, will be ebtitled to routine repairs at the landlord's expense. We shall get empty council houses back into use urgently and quickly. We shall boosts the funds available to the inner cities. This bold policy won't be easy and it won't be quick, but it can be done and it will be done.

ROY HATTERSLEY:

It must be done. The social pressures that unemployment, poor housing and poverty create are becoming a danger to us all. The tragedies which overcame Bristol, Brixton and Toxteth two years ago, could spread like wild-fire. The forces of law and order are under a strain which they cannot stand much longer. We need a positive and practical programme of crime prevention. Nothing can excuse the crime increase we've suffered, but there's no doubt that unemployment is one of its causes. As Willie Whitelaw said himself, 'if boys and girls do not obtain jobs they do not see any reason why they should take part in society and comply with its rules'. Since May 1979, serious crime has increased by thirty percent. Now a serious crime is committed every ten seconds. And more and more criminals are escaping capture and conviction. The detection rate has gone down ten percent since the Tories were elected, and all this is despite expenditure on the police increasing by two thirds. Our policies on law and order are preceise and practical. Peace and safety come from effective policing: police back amongst the people, on the beat and part of the community, well known, accepted and respected. So we'll operate a common-sense four point plan: police on foot, back on the streets; housing estates made more thief proof, with better lighting, an old people's warden service, and controlled entry into blocks of flats. Community police committees that give you a say on how your police behave. And better technical and support services for the police themselves. The victims of crime will be helped by a more generous scheme of compensation. And to keep the police a friendly part of the community we'll impose strict limits on searches, fingerprinting and the use of the power of arrest. Labour will create the social conditions which reduce crime. And we'll organise the police in a way which deters crime, and where crimes are committed, unlike today actually catches the criminals.

DENZIL DAVIES:

Labour's plan to reduce unemployment will need money. So will our housing programme and so will our reforms on law and order. And where will the money come from? It will come from ending the waste of the country's resources that Mrs Thatcher and her ministers are now encouraging. Seventeen billion pounds is wasted every year on the cost of unemployment. Twenty billion pounds, our income from North Sea oil, has been frittered away. And a further ten billion pounds is wasted abroad with little obvious benefit to Britain. Labour will use the country's resources to put money back into the economy and invest for expansion once again.
If you build a house, or repair a home, more building workers are needed. Other jobs are created which means more money in people's pockets, communities start to thrive again, so a youth centre is built, children and young people are kept off the streets, the streets become safer, and the local bobby is seen as part of the community, accepted by young and old alike. We have seen the consequences of unemployment, how it has a bad effect on the economy, on health, on housing and on law and order. Think about it. Mrs Thatcher has nothing to offer you at this election, except more of the same. Are you going to vote for retirement at sixteen? Are you going to vote for the death of the health service? Are you going to vote yourself out of a job? Or are you going to think positive, act positive, and say 'yes' to Labour?

MAN:

well I think we need more houses and the Tories are clearly not going to build more houses and er I can't see really why people should be unemployed and there're so many construction people (-) people in the construction industry unemployed when there's a such desperate housing shortage

WOMAN:

The housing did you say?

MAN:

Yeah

WOMAN:

Well we haven't built any have we?

SECOND MAN:

I blame it down to unemployment because of the the lads have got nothing else to to do but wander round the streets.

SECOND WOMAN:

My husband's unemployed. He's been unemployed for two years now , and he's only twenty-four. He can't get a job.

THIRD MAN:

I think they should be building er houses instead of spending money on er defence and all that.

FOURTH MAN:

I think the root of crime is is a s- social just unrest which is unemployment basically.

THIRD WOMAN:

I would never vote for Margaret Thatcher after what she's done to the country.

DENZIL DAVIES:

Think positive, act positive, vote Labour.
