26th September 1974

LEN MURRAY:

And to those outside our own ranks, who sneer at the social contract, who'll eagerly eagerly look for every sign of failure and ignore every success, let me say to them that whatever its limitations the social contract is the only way forward that stands any chance of success at all in this country at this time.

DENNIS HEALEY:

That wasn't one of those newspaper know-alls you see so much of on the box these days, that was a real man talking to real people, to people whose hard work is responsible for the fact that, despite all our present troubles, we live so much better today than our fathers and grandfathers did. And Len Murray is dead right. There just is no alternative to the social contract. The point was rammed home the other day by the very man who masterminded Mr Heath's statutory wage policy as head of the civil service - Sir William Armstrong. 'The Conservatives were wrong', he said, 'to try to enforce an incomes policy by law. It may take years', he said, 'but a voluntary agreement is the only way'. A voluntary agreement, and that's what the social contract is. But it takes two to make an agreement. Mr Heath could have had one three years ago if he'd been prepared to meet the unions half way on pensions, rents and prices. And prices are really the key.

SHIRLEY WILLIAMS:

We've basically picked on the essentials. We picked on them in terms of how much they mattered to the less well off groups in the community. We picked on them in terms of their nutritional value, and we picked on them because we knew the subsidy would reach the consumer. And it's a very striking fact today that something like three-quarters of all the protein eaten by pensioners comes from our subsidised food, that's one reason why we chose them. All the evidence is that means tested benefits don't reach all the people that they should reach, the best result is about sixty percent but in most cases it's a good deal less than that.

We wanted the subsidies to get to everybody who was badly off, who was hit by inflation, who was elderly, and therefore it goes to everybody but only the better off pay for it through extra taxes. What we said when we came to office was that inflation was hitting everybody, that it was only fair that the retailer should take his share as well, and we just [?] that there should be a ten percent cut in what are called gross profits. Now what that means is profits before you allow for costs. This is then a considerably bigger drop than that in real profits - as much as a quarter in most cases - and we knew we were being tough and we knew we had to do it because we felt that everybody should be involved in the battle against inflation even though it was hard.

What we asked the trade to do - and we didn't we we count everybody except the very small trader - but all the other traders we said to them, 'Look, we want you to concentrate this cut in profit margins on the most essential foods' and we entered into a voluntary agreement under which they concentrated the cut in profits on the essential foodstuffs and not on the luxury things, the lobster soups and so forth, and this we're satisfied has been done with the result that for the first time in a very long time the food index for the less well off groups has risen considerably less fast than the overall er rate in the cost of living.

DENNIS HEALEY:

What we're trying to do in Britain now is to create a new sort of unity between ordinary people and the government, because I don't think we in Westminster have any right to call for sacrifices from those who put us there unless we show that we care about the things that matter to the average family: prices, houses, schools, hospitals and so on. But above all that means jobs - the right to work. The only alternative to our social contract is the medicine the Conservatives tried last time they disguised themselves as a national coalition government in the thirties - mass unemployment. And I do wish that Sir Keith Joseph would answer this simple question: even if you set aside the insult to human dignity involved, how on earth can you justify making people who've got a job pay out eighteen hundred million pounds a year to keep two million active man and women idle on the dole, when the nation wants the goods they could produce as desperately as they want to produce them. And don't forget that this sort of unemployment also means bankruptcies, and bankruptcies on a colossal scale, in fact it means insecurity for everyone.

TONY BENN:

There are many firms that come to me er as minister and they're in difficulties, they give you no notice and yet er their difficulties have been building up over a long period and if they had discussed it frankly with their own people they would have come up with er solutions which might have been sufficient to deal with it.

MAN:

There are many private companies that have gone bust, people have lost their jobs, they're all [?] It is no consolation for them to be told that you were employed by a private owner.

WOMAN:

I know one man came in one morning with his car you know and everything and he went home the night without anything, no car, finished just like that, that was [?] management. Not just on the floor.

TONY BENN:

When I was in Liverpool the other day and I went into a firm where the receiver had been put in the managing director er lost his job and he was just as worried as the trade union representatives.

The principle object of our policy now is safeguarding jobs and creating new jobs in areas where they are needed, because there is great anxiety as you know about er er this at the moment and er quite apart from the people who are at present worried er there are areas of the country who over nine out of every hundred men are out of work.

All governments have put in subsidies into private manufacturing industry, it's running at about two million pounds a day. Now another thing that we've done of course is to extend the what are called development areas er Edinburgh - Leith - have been brought in, Merseyside has been made a special development area, Cardiff has been brought in because of anxiety there. And another thing we did is to double the regional employment premium, and this means that where people are working in areas of high unemployment the government can come in [does] through the regional employment premium, provide in effect a subsidy to employment, otherwise you get levels of unemployment that are really quite unacceptable.

DENNIS HEALEY:

There's a great deal the government can do and this government is doing it. But in the end, getting through the present crisis depends on all of us. We just have to learn to live together as a nation in anew and better way. Of course it won't all work perfectly straight off. But anyone who's really interested in the future of our country will be looking at the progress we're making and not the occasional upsets, because getting our industrial relations right is the most important single thing in Britain. We simply can't afford to go back to the sort of running battle between government and people we had only eight months ago. The social contract is a far better way, it is in fact the new deal Britain has been waiting for. It's not just about wages, it's about jobs, prices, houses, everything that really matters.

MICHAEL FOOT:

We've got to restore effective collective bargaining in British industry, as we did in the mining dispute. If we hadn't done it there, that strike and the three-day week would still be on. Then we've established a new conciliation and arbitration service which has already had some success in preventing some disputes from taking place, and I'm sure is going to have much more success in the years ahead. But most important, if you're going to have industrial peace, you must remove the injustices and the anomalies and the unfairness, particularly the anomalies and the unfairness that arose under the compulsory control of wages, under the Tory system which we abolished. And of course it takes time to do all those things. It's going to take time to establish our idea of industrial democracy, so that the workers shall have a much bigger say in the places where they work. Of course it's going to take time, but this is the exciting prospect ahead for this country if only we set aside the er the attacks and the confrontations of the past and realise that we can do it much better in the future.
