6th April 1992

JOHN MORTIMER:

When I think really back along my political life it started in 1945 with the big Labour landslide after the war and the first Atlee government which was undoubtedly the best of this century, and it was dedicated to great ideals - er the welfare state, more social equality, the abandonment of great differences between rich and poor, better education for everybody, better housing for everybody, and those ideals were in a way kept going by governments of both parties until the arrival of Mrs Thatcher, and then suddenly there was a great change - we were all told that those ideas were hopeless, ridiculous, they were sneered at and we're now left with a totally divided society.

PAUL GAMBACCINI:

Government is meant to serve the people, people aren't meant to serve the government.  The Tories have turned it around, they've made us the servants of government and that's wrong.

AMBULANCE DRIVER(M):

Under-funding, under-staffing, under-resourcing, you know we're all underestimated and we're all under stress - it's as simple as that.

CHILD MINDER (F):

All I can see is cuts, and it's a fight all the time to get good child provision.

RICHARD ATTENBOROUGH:

I am angry about the fact that government plays lip-service pays lip-service to concerns about those who are incapable by virtue of circumstance of looking after themselves.

DAVID YIPP:

I believe in a health service which is free at the point of access.  The health service has saved my life three times and I want it to be there to save other people's lives.

MIDWIFE:

There's eighteen thousand more administrators in the last three years but not extra midwives or nurses.

BUILDER (M):

Not even the Communist party could er [inaudible] the country the way the Tory has.

FORMER CAMBRIDGE VC (M):

They have mismanaged the economy and engineered what is already the worst recession in living memory.

THEATRE DIRECTOR (F):

People must be able to go to the dentist, they must be able to get their eyes fixed ,you know, a healthy nation is a prosperous nation.

ECONOMICS PROFESSOR(M):

I think the main problem about the last five years has been the truly appalling economic mismanagement.

PENSIONER(M):

Two of my girls were made redundant through no fault of the factory but through the recession in this country today.

DAVID PUTTNAM:

I'm desperately keen that my children and now my grandchildren grow up in a society which isn't riddled by class.

PAEDIATRICIAN (F):

When I was working with deprived children in the east end of London I found that fifty percent of their parents were out of work.

KINNOCK SPEECH:

What's at issue in this election is not the soap boxes that the Prime Minister stands on - it's the cardboard boxes that people have to live in that's at issue.

JULIET STEVENSON:

I go home at night from this theatre and I see doorways littered with people, some young, some old, many mentally unstable.

HELENA KENNEDY:

I want to see er a bill of rights, I want to see erm a change in the way in which judges are appointed, I want to see women participating much more in the law, and I'd like to see the law belonging to the people.

COLIN TARRANT:

What kind of government is it that can send these children to inadequate schools with woefully demoralised staff?

STEPHEN FRY:

The heart needs to be put back in Britain and I think only Labour can do it.  Only Labour has the energy and commitment, the excitement to generate a new kind of Britain.

CARMEN CALLIL:

I really think it's time that the fifty eight percent of people who didn't vote Tory in the last election had their turn and their say in how the country's run.

KINNOCK SPEECH:

I say this that the government that will react to children's pain in the way that they did is unfit to govern.

INDUSTRIALIST:

They're young, they're dynamic, they're imaginative, they want to get the country moving again.

STEVE CRAM:

Sport is something which is very important to me.  The reason why I vote Labour is that I want to see facilities that I enjoyed as a youngster maintained.

SOLICITOR (F):

Women will flourish in a system of fairness and equality - that has been conspicuously lacking under the Tory party for the last thirteen years.

PENSIONERS (M AND F):

I think the most important thing that Labour are talking about is investment in industry for training.

TEACHER (M):

I'm going to vote Labour because I want the sort of country that Labour stands for, I want to see the economy back on its feet and going.

BUSINESS WOMAN:

From the Labour government I most hope that working class women will be taken seriously for the first time.

B.R. TRAINING MANAGER (M):

As a parent and also as a school governor I'm concerned about the future of our education service.

WARDEN OF WADHAM COLLEGE, OXFORD (M):

Our kids, our children are going to get a better chance - all of them from all classes - and I care a lot about that.

UNIVERSITY OF WALES PROFESSOR (M):

Never in thirty five years of university teaching have I experienced such a degree of demoralisation among my colleagues.

SOFTWARE ENGINEER (F):

I'll be having my baby in four months and the future of that child is very important particularly in education, er Labour guarantee a nursery place and that's very important to me.

STEPHEN HAWKING:

Education and science are vital to the future of our country that is why I'm voting Labour.

SIR DENNIS FOREMAN:

First of all the leader our leader Neil has got vigour, imagination and energy.

BEN ELTON:

I was reading only recently how the American correspondents having read the British press on the subject of Neil Kinnock had been astonished to meet him, to follow him around with the campaign, to find a person of dignity, of courage, of good humour, passion and commitment.

COMPANY DIRECTOR (F):

He's got spirit and he's got character and he's got vision and it's something that his opposite number does not appear to have.

ANTHONY SHER:

He's somehow held on to his identity despite the pressures of politics, and what you get is a very real person with heartfelt passion and conviction and strength.

KINNOCK SPEECH:

We will fight recession. We will fight unemployment. We will use the resources properly. We will give priority to the old and the poor and the children and the health care and the education system. That's what democratic government should be about.

WELSH MAN (EX MP?):

Neil is primarily first and foremost a family man, and if there is one thing which Britain needs today it's someone who can unite the people of this country.  As a politician myself I know how cruel my opponents have been and how cruel our opponents are today and Neil Kinnock has conducted this election in my view in an incomparable way with dignity.

KINNOCK SPEECH:

Now is the time for our country to start pulling together, pulling together for the sake of the pensioners, pulling together to give the youngsters a chance, pulling together against the waste and the cost of unemployment. Now is the time to make our country safer, cleaner, more secure. Now is the time to make our country stronger and more successful. Now is the time for Britain to pull together. Now is the time for change. Now is the time for Labour

BARRISTER (M):

People who are rich who are well off can look after themselves, it is the young or the old and the ill and the homeless that the society has to look the government has to look for.

ALAN RICKMAN:

I just think it's time that we decided what kind of society, not that just we want to live in but what kind of society we want to hand on to our children, because their inheritance at the moment is a dreadful one.

WARD SISTER:

I will vote Labour because of its commitment to the health service, because of its commitment to people, to the ordinary man and woman in the street.