24th April 1997

Synopsis
The broadcast interweaves 'interview' footage (although we never see the interviewer, who is the film-maker Molly Dineen) with scenes of Blair signing a poster, playing football with children, talking to children in school, making speeches, playing tennis, listening to a woman complain about the health service, visiting a hospital with his wife, and getting on a plane. The 'interviews' take place in two cars, a train, and Blair's kitchen.

TONY BLAIR:
If you'd said to me at sort of eighteen, nineteen, you're gonna be a politician, I'd've said forget it. Anything else anything but being a politician.
DINEEN:
Why on what grounds?

TONY BLAIR:
Oh 'cos I thought politicians were complete pains in the backside.
And there is a part of you that constantly wonders whether it is worth staying in politics because of all the the the rubbish that you have to do, I mean you just have to do it.

You've just got to keep a grip of yourself, and, and hope that your humanity sees you through, and in the end understand why you want to be in it.

What I keep saying to people is: get behind the image. It's quite difficult to bring people to actually see the type of person you are.

My ambition when I was a child was to play football for Newcastle United. That was my greatest ambition, and I kept trying to talk my dad into using whatever meagre influence he had with the Newcastle United to get me a trial, but he never did.

Because my dad was very active, I mean he was active in Tory politics actually, locally in fact they had him lined up to fight a, to fight a seat, and become a member of parliament, but then he became very ill so everything he gave up, everything. But we, we discussed it, and then when I started really being Labour, there was a slight problem for a time, but he never really objected to it because he's come over to the Labour party now, so it's all fine.

I think my generation is trying to get to a different type of politics, which is rooted in strong values and convictions, but it's not quite left and right in the way that it's been before.

I just think that, for a whole generation of people, they thought that if they arrived, and did well, then you became a Tory. You know it's like people used to say: well if you bought your house, if you owned your own home, then you were a Tory, it's crazy.

I've always understood, because of dad, why some people who've done very well, come up in life, made it on their own, felt the Tory party was the party that was for them, because it was the party of ambition and aspiration, and that the Labour party somehow wasn't, and I think to an extent, I mean, that's what the Labour party became. It became too stuck in the past, too rooted in the [inaudible] that's where you are, that's where you stay, whereas today I think the position has changed round. What I've always wanted for today's Labour party is to be the party of aspiration [inaudible] say you know you can have a society where there's ambition without a lack of compassion and

DINEEN:
Yes I was going to say: so why aren't you a Tory?
BLAIR:
Because I think that in the end you actually fulfil, I think you fulfil your ambitions better in a society where people have some sense of duty towards other people.
Homework - well you're gonna have a lot of that under Labour. You wait you wait till David Blunkett gets hold of you, you'll be doing a lot of homework, ha ha ha.

The kids, they keep you grounded because you're seeing all through them and through their friends. You know what's actually happening all the time, you just go back to understanding why you're there and why you want to be in it.

There's a sense in which I just feel people have got to understand things can change. I mean it's just so daft to think they couldn't be better. I mean it could be better. You could if you decided on a, even if you decided right, the education system, let's say education and welfare were gonna be the only things you're worried about and everything else stayed the same even.

BLAIR SPEECH:
Ask me my three main priorities for government and I tell you education, education, education.
BLAIR:
The job of being a politician is to change the country in the way that you think is right for the country [inaudible] there's no point in being in it unless you want to change things. If all you want to do is do your job, you want to sit in the office behind a desk signing papers, there's not much point in doing it, but it's like anything you know, it's like what we did with the Labour party, we had a clear series of objectives to modernise the Labour party, bring it up to date, and we've got to do the same with the country. And it can be done. So when I say education, education, education what that means is not just all the specifics of policy, it means that I am prepared to put every single bit of drive and energy that I've got into changing the education system of this country.
For me education is almost like trade union reform was for Margaret Thatcher. To me education is the big passion, it's the thing that you know should drive everything that we're doing, which is one of the reasons why it's so crazy that today we spend more on unemployment than we do on education. If a family's got people in the home where no-one's working, how can the kids grow up with any sense of the work ethic, any sense of turning up to work on time earning a wage, then they start living in a different culture in a different society, and when that actually happens then all the other problems come with them all the crime all the drugs benefits bills, and when I talk about getting young people off benefit and into work it's not [inaudible] uncaring, on the contrary the only proper true compassionate way to care is to say we're going to do something about that.

BLAIR SPEECH:
As the first step we will implement a programme to take two hundred and fifty thousand young people off benefit and into work, funded by a one-off windfall levy on the excess profits of the privatised monopoly utilities
BLAIR:
They say that there's a great new Labour Party that's gonna change the world, but you know they're just cynical, people are cynical about politics and politicians because they've had a government for, at least for the past few years, that have kept promising things, never delivered them, that has havered on one thing and another thing, and people have almost got to the point where they say "Well what's the use? You're all the same. You know nothing's ever gonna make any difference". And of course the Tories in a sense delight in that, because then people say "well we may as well [inaudible] just to stick with what we've got". But you don't have to stick with what you've got. It's absurd to say that we cannot be better than this.
There is a battle for resources in the National Health Service because we're spending so much money now on increased administration. But it, it's more than just about the resources in the health service. What's really happening is that the Conservatives don't understand why we created the health service. They don't understand it. The health service to me is a living breathing symbol of what a decent civilised society should mean in practice, helping people on the basis of their need not on the basis of their wealth.

When my father became ill, when I was ...um... ten, eleven, and he ...er... had a stroke, and all our lives changed after that, really. Well for the first twenty four hours we weren't sure whether he was gonna live or not, so then then that was OK, but then when he came back home he really couldn't do anything, which was very tough for him because he was a public speaker, he was a good public speaker, he was a barrister, a good public speaker, so all those things had to stop. He had to give up his political ambitions. Everything changed. Yeah well it was, the amazing thing is, he did actually rebuild his life and my mother of course she nursed him for three years, taught him how to speak again, and I think when my mother died, when I was twenty one, you got a sense of urgency into your life [inaudible] do you know what I mean? You suddenly thought well you've actually quite a short time you've got, so you better get on, you better get things done, you better do things.

BLAIR SPEECH:
We must awaken and ignite in our people the hope that change can bring, because the last weapon the Tories have, you know their final weapon, is despair and cynicism. It's telling people well it doesn't matter who's in power 'cos they're all the same, it'll make no difference, nothing can ever change. Rubbish. Of course things can change. When they say "don't let Labour ruin it" I say to them "Britain can be better than this".

BLAIR:
You see I can't I couldn't imagine myself actually sitting in Downing Street, let's say, doing the job, having those things going on out there and not be just like some sort of great galvanizing force driving through the change to make things better. I just couldn't imagine doing it.
