29th March 1966

HAROLD WILSON:

This Thursday - for Britain, for all of us - is the day of decision. We have had the tumult and the shouting, the heckling, the charges and the counter-charges of party in-fighting. Now it is my duty to present the real issues, the issues we stall be deciding for five years. It is a choice between parties, the record of each, the policies of each. But going even beyond policy is the vision that each party offers you for the future, the kind of Britain we want to see, the kind of Britain in which we want our children to grow up, the opportunity they will have in life. The influence this new Britain can have in leading the world to peace. There are those whose horizons for Britain are confined to company reports and the counting house. Do we want to see Britain no more than a glorified super-market? We want a Britain which tempers economic efficiency, and strength and independence, with compassion for those amongst us who most need our help, with respect for their human dignity. In my final broadcast before the last elections I quoted the words of Franklin Roosevelt: 'Better the occasional faults of a government living in the spirit of compassion than the consistent omissions of a government frozen in the ice of its own indifference'. The task of government - and it is a parliament and a government that we shall be choosing on Thursday - the task of government is to translate that vision into reality. This is the central choice in this election. The government you want.

For two years and more before 1964, Britain had no government. Their vision for Britain, whatever it may have been, had withered and perished. For seventeen months now Britain has had a government. You may not agree with everything this government has done. But you will agree that - facing the most formidable economic problem a government can have been left to deal with, and with a parliamentary majority of only three, we have taken the decisions that had to be taken, we have neither feared electoral unpopularity nor been pushed around by any vested interest, however powerful. And this has to go on. With the problems we are still facing, we need government. We cannot afford to relapse into the thirteen year posture of drift, and indecision and indifference. We offer no soft and easy road. I do not believe this nation is in a mood to be lulled by easy, unattainable promises. It is a call to action we offer you and our people will respond only if the government gives the lead. It is the economic challenge which dominates the whole life of the nation. I have described 1966 as make-or-break year. That is one reason why we cannot afford another six months or more of electioneering, or of a parliament, with urgent tasks before it, paralysed and frustrated month after month by an inadequate majority. But that challenge is one that can be met only by the government and the whole nation working together in partnership. In my first broadcast, from 10 Downing Street, on that October afternoon of 1964, I said then that there is nothing we cannot do together. And already, after only seventeen months, we have shown what can be done.

There may be election arguments in Britain but the world recognises the reality of our achievement over this seventeen months. It pays tribute to the unconquerable determination of this government and this people to make our country strong again, and sterling strong again. I never believed that this nation, with its history, with its skill, its aptitudes, and inventiveness, was to be for ever condemned, as for so long we seemed to be condemned, to miss the tides of history and of economic challenge. The success we have achieved so far, in a bare seventeen months, towards paying our way, towards achieving a lasting economic strength and independence, let this not be underrated. There have been those who, for political reasons, have been prepared to belittle and to disparage the efforts of our country, to belittle the achievements of the British nation working in partnership with the government they elected. They may, in the heat of this election battle, want to discredit the achievements of your government, but that is no reason for selling Britain short at home and abroad.

The progress we have made has been achieved because we were not afraid to apply emergency measures, to cut back costly programmes that were beyond the capacity of a nation facing external crisis. We faced great unpopularity through cutting back extravagant defence projects and even putting off for a time some of our most cherished social objectives. We held back and postponed less essential public expenditure and commercial expenditure alike. But our economic strategy was based on priorities. This was no return to the blunt axe, of Conservative stop-go policy of the past years. We have maintained full employment. What we have sought to achieve and what we are in the process of achieving is not unemployment, but redeployment on the priority tasks that Britain faces. We have brought new work, new life, new hope to the areas the Conservatives neglected. We have safeguarded house building, school building and hospital building. Indeed we are building more houses, more schools, more hospitals than ever before.

But however necessary the measures of the past seventeen months have been, these cannot be the main theme of our attack on the underlying economic problem Britain has been facing. We had been brought to the brink because for thirteen years British industry had lost ground in the world. Productivity lagged behind every other industrial country because investment in new plant and machinery lagged behind. We failed to modernise, restrictive practices and attitudes were entrenched, almost enshrined, because of long periods of industrial stagnation, with profits easy to earn on the soft, home market. From the word go, we have set out to get a new and more dynamic approach in industry. With a new partnership with productive industry, the government has become a forcing house of change, pressing industries to apply the results of scientific research in factory and workshop, probing the sources of industrial weakness and building up the hard centre industries we need to develop. We have taken direct action to change attitudes in industry. There has been firm and positive action industry by industry, to deal with unofficial strikes. Across the table talks, as we had a few weeks ago with management and unions in the railway industry, to link, pay with productivity and productivity with pay. We have attacked the problem industries. Devlin taking the lid off dockland, followed by firm action by government and industry. Plowden tearing away the illusions about the aircraft industry, and laying down the plan which we are following, for a viable and securely-based industry. Now Geddes on shipbuilding, which the government will follow up urgently.

No-one expected us in seventeen months to revolutionise British industry, to build the factories, to redeploy our industrial strength, from an over concentration on the home market to meet the challenge of world markets. To carry through a scientific revolution in less than a year and a half to turn the results into a second and new industrial revolution even more far-reaching than the first. But the job has begun. We are getting results. Industry is stirring itself. Britain is on the move again and it is on the move because we are making a direct frontal attack on out-dated industrial methods, on selfish and sectional attitudes in British industry. And the attack is not a series of unrelated expedients - it is based on one central strategy, set out for the nation to see - our National Plan for the next five years. A plan worked out with the most enterprising and far-sighted men in British industry to carry us into the 1970s. The National Plan is a breakthrough in national economic policy, a breakthrough too in our history of economic government by partnership and consent. Economic regeneration, social advance, a plan not only for Britain, but for every part of Britain, and for the rebuilding of the smoky, dingy, environment we inherited from the Victorian industrial revolution. For economic achievement is not an end, but a means. It is essential for Britain's independence for our influence abroad. It will provide the munitions to fight the only war your government seeks, the world war against hunger, poverty and disease.

For economic efficiency, the solution of our industrial problems, means nothing if the Britain we are building is not tampered with the spirit of compassion. But, even though the life of this government has been overshadowed by the economic crisis we inherited, we have carried through in seventeen months one of the greatest programmes of social advance in Britain's parliamentary history. In 1964, we all accepted the vision of a New Britain, of a fairer and juster society. From the moment the government was formed, we have been building that New Britain. We restored a sense of social priorities - with the speediest possible help for the old, the sick, the war disabled, the widowed. Just as building the New Britain involves care for those in need, equally it has meant quick action to deal with the housing problem -the greatest social challenge of the 1970s. That challenge has to be met, as we are meeting it, by an attack on the slums, and over-crowding in our big cities. For the children, who are to inherit the New Britain we are building, will never have the start they ought to have in life if they are condemned to live in conditions which no civilised society can tolerate.

The task is not only to build more houses, we have had to deal with problems created by the Conservative Rent Act. We have restored security to families in their homes and have set up machinery for fixing rents which are fair as between landlord and tenant. Urgent, and high among the priorities for the next parliament, will be our measure to deal with the land problem, further help to ease the burden of rates, and rising council house rents, our charter for the leaseholder and our practical help for those who are buying their own homes and those young couples who want to buy their own homes. For what we are concerned with is the security, the happiness, the welfare of every family in Britain and for a fairer opportunity in education, and in life, for every child in every home.

We are building a Britain where human values count, where we are members one of another, concerned for the community, for others, for our families, not just for ourselves. This is the Britain we are building, the Britain we have started to in these seventeen months. It is a task worthy of the energies of a great people. Its foundations lie in the firm base of economic strength we have to create. We can achieve it by the efforts of a united people, of one nation, when the divisive clamour of these recent weeks has died away. There are too many people prepared to write us off abroad and even nearer home. Let them realise that the nation they saw, or thought they saw in those thirteen years, is not the real Britain. We face a tremendous challenge and we have not at any time during these seventeen months, or in this election period, sought for one moment to conceal the fact that a hard road still lies ahead for us. But all our history proclaims that there are deep reserves of strength and power which are brought out to the full when Britain has a government prepared to tell the people the facts, to tell the people what has got to be done. So this Thursday can mark a new stage in the partnership between the people of Britain and their government - a government which is prepared to say, and to mean: This is your country, now let us join together to work for it.
