18th May 1983

ACTRESS IMPERSONATING THATCHER:

We Tories believe in policies that will create real jobs. We have established the essential foundations for a sound economy.

KINNOCK:

You've heard a lot like that from the Tories and over the next few weeks you'll hear a lot more. And it'll all be equally false. The tragic truth is that the Conservative government of Mrs Thatcher has been destroying the foundation for a sound economy. Two million extra people have been thrown on the dole, one for every sixty seconds of Tory government. It's by far the biggest increase in unemployment in the industrial world. Our young people, the future of the country, form forty percent of the jobless total. Two out of three school leavers can't find work.
And even if you've got a job you're paying at least six pounds more in real terms in taxes than you did four years ago despite the Tory promises to cut those taxes. Total output is down twelve percent on 1979 despite the fact that we've had the bonus of North Sea oil. Imports are up by twelve percent. Investment is down by thirty-six percent. Do you think this is economic success? We're told Tory policy has led to a leaner, more efficient and productive industry. Thirty-four thousand firms have gone bust under the Tories; prices have risen by fifty-one percent; our factories' production is down by nineteen percent. Success! In Thatcher's Britain only the demolition men have got full employment.

And now you're being asked to vote for more of the same thing. The people round here don't want more of the same. Unemployment's bad enough in London and the south east, but in Coventry in Liverpool in South Wales in Glasgow in Northern Ireland it's totally unacceptable. Everybody, young and old, black and white, men and women has got the right to work. Jobs are absolutely linked with the economy, they go hand in hand. So to start putting the economy right the thing to do is to get Britain working again, and only Labour has worked out a programme for doing just that. It won't be easy and it won't be quick, but it can be done and for our country it must be done. Labour is committed to getting Britain working again, by investing in industry, investing in construction, investing in rebuilding.

KINNOCK IN STUDIO:

A new factory means new jobs long before it even opens. With new machinery the factory means real lasting jobs for engineers and steel-workers. People earn more, and now they can buy the goods they want and need. Shops flourish with the increased trade so still more factories have full order loads. Increased production leads to increased efficiency and so to increased competitiveness abroad - better chances for exports. Exports need the ships to carry them, so another cruelly hit industry starts to grow again. And the biggest benefit of all is social. Lessening the financial worries means a happier more secure family and the knowledge that the youngsters of Britain have a real chance for the future. The Tories are always negative. They say 'We can't afford it and this is no time for expansion'. Leading British economist, Professor Morris Peston, believes exactly the opposite.

MORRIS PESTON:

It is only fair to judge a government by its record. This Tory government must certainly be assessed by its economic performance which has been disastrous. Whether we look at output or manufacturing investment or employment they've all been going down, and they've been going down as a result of this government's policy actions, not as the result of any evil outside forces or as a result of bad luck, they've been the result of government policy. And then it follows, it stands to reason that what we require is the reversal of such policies and then we'll start to move forward again. And the essence of that reversal will be a rise in oublic expenditure to get industry going and also a cut in taxes which will also lead to a rise in private expenditure. The two together will provide a basis, as long as they're kept going, for sustainable advance which will at last get this country back to work again, and at last get it producing at maximum capacity.

KINNOCK:

An expansionary set of moves as a basis for the way forward: that's Labour's economic policy, and Labour's Chancellor of the Exchequer will be Peter Shore.

PETER SHORE:

If at the general election four years ago I had said to you that if you had elected a Conservative government Britain would have three and a half million people unemployed four years later I don't think you would have believed me. You'd've said that that was a a wild political er exaggeration. But of course that has been our experience. And it is er ironic indeed, that the very government that has created this appalling problem for Britain should now claim that governments can do nothing at all in order to reverse the trend. And that it was they're saying. They're saying that Britain is stuck with three and a half million unemployed and that there is nothing that government or anyone else can do about it. But I say that's a council of despair and I don't believe it, and on the contrary I believe that there's a great deal that government can do. Governments are not all powerful, we know that, but the impact of government on the economy, the impact of government on job-creation, is very great. And what I want to do, is to use the resource of government, the power of government, not to destroy jobs, but to create them.
And I believe we can do it. I believe we can do it if we set about bringing into use, all those idle resources of plant and machinery, of capital and of course of people who want to work, who want to contribute to our national life, and who want to help meet the enormous and varied needs of all our people. But in given the depth of our present slump it is government that has got to make the first move. It is government that has got to increase, not decrease, increase its expenditure - at least initially - in order to get the economy moving again. That it was I intend to do. Not a wild splurge, but a clear increase of something of the order of six percent expenditure in our first year and yes, some cut too in the great burden of taxation that we now have to face.

Of course Mrs Thatcher says 'where's the money coming from?' but the answer to that you know isn't difficult to find. We will need to borrow, we need to borrow I reckon about six billion pounds a year. More than twelve billion pounds a year have been leaving Britain to be invested by the managers of great institutions - your money and my money in pension funds and insurance companies - in the industries and in the economies of our competitors overseas. I want only about a half of that sum to really start the first major move to get Britain back to work. And in addition to that, I want to see the massive oil revenues from Britain turned to productive use, to refurbish and strengthen our industries throughout the land. We certainly need to. Now I believe the government can, as I say, change the whole prospect, providing they have the support of the people, of this country. We've got to change, there is an alternative, and we must seize it on election day.

KINNOCK:

The biggest single problem facing the economy is unemployment. An effective positive programme to create jobs will rebuild the economy and only one party has concentrated on creating such a programme. But a positive programme can't be put into effect without positive support. On June the ninth you have the opportunity to vote. Are you going to vote your children out of a future? Are you going to vote for another thirty-four thousand firms to close, or are you going to act positively and vote 'yes' for Labour?

MAN IN STREET:

Well, I feel that Labour at the moment are the only party that we have to put this country back where it should be.

WOMAN:

Well, since the Conservatives have been in power unemployment has risen you know so high. I've now graduated with a degree and I'm still unemployed, you know, on the long list.

SECOND MAN:

Erm I've always been Labour but I'm, you know, more than ever now by what's by what I've seen happening around me you know.

SECOND WOMAN:

I've got the qualifications and that but there's no jobs going. I can't get 'em, don't wanna know.

THIRD MAN:

Well I think we've had enough oppression in the country, you know with er capital this capitalist motivated government, and I think that we've just got to have an alternative.

THIRD WOMAN:

Well I hope that Labour's gonna do something about it.
KINNOCK: Think positive, act positive, vote Labour.

