10th April 1997

Synopsis
This broadcast consists of two parts. It opens with a montage of the City of London: tall buildings, unusual camera angles, shots of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown. This is accompanied by the voices of Roddick, Conran, Charkham and Robinson making their introductory comments. The second part is a series of 'interviews' (although we never hear the interviewer's voice) with the 4 Labour business people. As they make their points the subjects are pictured in their offices and also 'at work'.

ANITA RODDICK:
Business is more powerful than government, it is quicker, it is more creative.
TERENCE CONRAN:
Business is the lifeblood of the country.

JONATHAN CHARKHAM:
From business come all the benefits society needs: employment, investment, revenue for social programmes.
GERRY ROBINSON:
I think, frankly, there's only one party that can represent Britain best, getting business right, and that's new Labour.

RODDICK:
In 1976 it was just me, twenty-one years later we have over fifteen hundred shops in forty-seven countries. One of the great myths of the last eighteen years is that the Tories are entrepreneurs you know [entrepreneurial] is taking a situation that you have now and changing their lack of strength, their lack of vision is, is palpable. I didn't vote Labour last time, now they seem to be listening to the entrepreneurs and I think it'll be a very exciting time for British business. Whenever I've spoken to Tony Blair what comes through is conviction, a sense of what Labour will give. I like the way he looks exhausted. I like the way he's working, and finally a politician that is not arrogant. Labour is definitely a party that business can do business with.

CHARKHAM:
I've been in business and I've worked as advisor to the government, for the Bank of England. I think that governments get tired, and it shows, and it has shown terribly the last two or three years. Why shouldn't it be perfectly natural for a businessman, having looked at what the parties intend to do, decide to vote Labour? Gordon Brown is going to be an iron chancellor. He will finally put to bed the idea that the Labour party has to be a party of high spending and high taxation. What they want, and what they'll strive mightily to achieve, is steadiness in terms of inflation because only then will there be the confidence that is necessary for long term investment, which this country is crying out for.

CONRAN:
Habitat ...er... started ...er... in London in the early sixties, and I tried to ...erm... bring things that were well designed to the mass market, and it got rave reviews and gradually we ...erm... expanded and it became the catalyst for building something called the Storehouse, which the turnover was about one and a half billion pounds a year. John Major is not strong enough to run a cabinet and keep that cabinet together, and I do think that Tony Blair will be strong enough. I'm impressed by his dynamism. I'm impressed by his understanding the importance of business to the economy of this country, and to the quality of life in this country.

ROBINSON:
I'm the chairman of Granada group ...er... and I've been chairman for the last six months. Prior to that I was chief executive for five years. Well Granada's in a number of businesses. We have Granada TV rental, [inaudible] Granada television, we have ...er... catering and hotel interests, motorway operations, as well as Little Chef Happy Eaters. We employ just under eighty thousand people. I think what I bring to organisation is clarity. I set out very clearly what I hope the organisation can achieve and then lay out plans in order to achieve it. Well those skills are exactly the same skills you need in running anything, whether it's the country, whether it's a business, whether it's the party. People like Tony Blair [inaudible] creating new Labour. It's a phenomenal change, and I have no doubt at all in having set out very clear objectives for Labour in government that Tony Blair will also deliver that, and that's about leadership, that quality of leadership comes through again and again and again, genuinely one of the most refreshing things about this ...er... election I believe is that the Labour party are not saying everything was wrong. I have always voted Conservative I've been a Conservative voter ever since I was allowed to vote. I have changed my mind, and I'm going to vote Labour on this occasion for the very simple reason that I believe it's the right choice for Britain.

CAPTION:
NEW LABOUR BECAUSE BRITAIN DESERVES BETTER
