12th March 1966

HAROLD WILSON:

I don't suppose you are any keener than I am to have another general election less than 18 months after the last one. For something like three years public affairs in this country and the job of the government - have been conducted against the background of an expected early election. In October 1964, you elected a new government. You gave us a job to do, and we've been doing it.

But the government's majority in the House of Commons, the smallest in our modern parliamentary history, has been three, and when one of our members died it was two. This has not so far stopped us from getting on with the job of governing. From the moment we came into office, finding that we had inherited the gravest economic crisis of the post-war years, we acted firmly and decisively, without regard to political popularity or unpopularity, or to the fact that at any time if we were defeated, an election might be only a month away, and as the Chancellor's progress report to the nation last week showed, in 1965, with a new sense of purpose in British industry, the eight hundred millions trade and payments gap of 1964 had been cut to less than half, exports were up and the rise in imports had been contained.

That is not all: and indeed in the last three months of the year we were just about paying our way, but there is still a long way to go. And again nor has our small majority prevented us from carrying through a massive programme of government legislation, eighty-five Acts of Parliament in just over five hundred days. In 1964 we promised to build a new Britain. We have made a powerful start. A great number of the measures that we outlined in the last election are now the law of the land, often after the most bitter parliamentary opposition, often carried by only the smallest of majorities. And what has been achieved is the result of our decision to tell the nation the facts, good or bad, encouraging or discouraging, and then asking everyone whatever their political views, to buckle to and take the measures that have had to be taken. And this is what I am going to do now and throughout this election. Never mind what they say.

The facts are these. However encouraging the progress we have made - and don't let's underrate that progress - we have still a long way to go to reach our target of paying our way abroad, standing on our own feet, of paying off the debts that were incurred to pay for the deficit we found awaiting us seventeen months ago. We are not offering you any soft easy road, any smooth election promises that can't be honoured. And if we ever thought of doing it, well, we are all too grown up for anyone to fall for it. And what has to be done is urgent. I have said that 1966 is our make or break year, the year when we - not the government alone but the nation, all of us together - have got to decide whether this country is going to go forward, vigorous, assertive, independent, or whether we are going to get into a situation where we are content to drift about in the shallows, while other nations leave us behind. And this means that the urgent measures that we have taken to revitalise British industry, to increase investment in new and more modern machinery, to get firms and industries in the less prosperous areas of Britain, these must be pressed home. And for this we need an adequate parliamentary majority to overcome time-wasting obstructions by those who are opposed to these measures, without seeing parliament paralysed, brought to a standstill, for perhaps months at a time by illness, or by the death of one of our colleagues. Last year, when we were trying to get a major programme of tax reform through parliament, they told us we had no right to try and enact a major controversial programme with a majority of three. What they were saying was that we had no right to try to govern, to do the job you gave us to do, with a majority of three.

All right. What we are asking now is for a mandate to do that job. Our Government Bills on housing, finance for local councils, who are clearing the slums and fighting over-crowding, for helping with rates, for dealing with land shortages and rocketing land prices, our proposals to end the leasehold problem, the Ombudsman measures - and many more - all the things that weren't done in the thirteen years - we can't have these imperilled. But it's not only Bills in Parliament. That is only part of a government's job. There are our relations with industry. The need to get a sense of urgency into industry - both sides of industry - to fight and get rid of restrictive practices, costly waste of manpower, inefficient attitudes of management. This means what we need is a full day's work by everybody for a full day's pay. This means that the Government must be able to speak with authority about everything that needs to be done. If we are going to do everything that we need to do to keep sterling strong, and to build up confidence abroad in sterling, in Britain, we must be free to act and act with decision.

But it's not only at home: Britain has begun to count again in the counsels of the world. But you've got to be able to plan ahead, with some degree of certainty. Whoever speaks for Britain must be seen to speak for Britain. You may not like what I say on behalf of Britain, and if you don't you'll decide to vote for one of the others. But whoever speaks for Britain must speak with authority - and this means a good working majority. Now how should you decide who ought to get that majority? Well one thing I will say, the Labour Government has promised nothing we cannot and will not fulfil. Our manifesto contains nothing that we have not been working on, carrying through as a government. You are not going to listen to any party which glibly promises you the earth in increased expenditure, expenditure which would cost one thousand millions a year extra - and promises at the same time to cut taxation. We have taken over the last year a grip of government expenditure. The expenditure estimates for this year are only one point eight per cent up on last years in fixed prices: for the first time for heaven knows how long, expenditure is under control. And this has meant tough decisions in defence where we have for the first time a government programme based on realism; military realism, yes and economic realism. In social expenditure, too; some programmes we cherish have had to be cut back or postponed. But everything we are promising is covered within our programme - control and costed expansion year by year, for the next five years. On the records, on the credibility of the various party programmes, the credibility tested in measures, and in terms of men, you will be the judge. On their record - over thirteen years - you have formed your views, and no words of mine would move you one way or the other now.

On ours? We have tackled the economic challenge. We have a good record to show. Facing a formidable deficit, we cut back, while we were waiting for our positive policies of industrial expansion and modernisation to take effect. But you know this has not been the old stop-go. Unemployment is lower today than for ten years. We have brought new hopes to the neglected areas of the north-west and north-east and Scotland and Wales. And while we have been fighting the crippling economic crisis we have pushed ahead with social reform. Increases in pensions, prescription charges abolished, the earnings rule for widows abolished, redundancy payments introduced, earnings related sick and unemployment benefits introduced: security against evictions, our Rent act, repealing the vicious Tory Rent Act of 1957; all these are now the law of Britain. And our further programmes, rates, help with rents, leaseholds, mortgages: these are part of our policy. So far then - but there is so much more to do. And it's for you to decide. So what is this election about? A party battle? Yes, in a way it is. But it is really about government. The government you elected in 1964 - is it to have the tools to do the job that you gave it to do? This election is not about promises. It is about records and it is about policies. Their record - twelve years of it. Our record - only seventeen months, with a small majority, but with an unconquerable determination to do the best for Britain and for all of us. Their policies - I hope you will study them against their record. Ours, I hope you will study ours too, against our record after only seventeen months. So let's have an end, for five years, to electioneering by coming to a decision now and when we have taken that decision, let all of us then get on with the job.
