25th March 1966

GEORGE BROWN:

After twelve days, more than two thousand miles of travel across Britain, nearly one hundred meetings, I have come back with rather a husky voice, I fear, but with one clear impression outstanding in my mind. People really regard this as the decisive election. They understand that the choice before us is whether Britain shall go on with the economic and social advance so recently begun with Labour, or whether we slide back. Now in the seventeen months since we took office the Labour Government has been firm: it has acted to control the basic causes of our troubles; it has set out to revitalise our industry and it has led a successful drive to increase our exports. The government's determined action has brought about the most striking difference in Britain's economic situation.

In 1965, our only full year, the Conservative deficit of eight hundred million pounds was reduced to three hundred and fifty million - a far greater cut than anybody would have thought likely in such a short period. And this has been achieved against enormous difficulties, and not the least of those was our tiny parliamentary majority. This has inevitably created uncertainty in the minds of many whose co-operation is most needed both at home and abroad. However, unlike the Conservatives who ran away from all decisions throughout 1964, we determined from the very beginning not to let these problems inhibit us from doing everything necessary to get the disastrous Tory legacy under control.

Nor have we been deterred from our course either by fear of unpopularity or by consideration of possible electoral consequences. We felt sure that so long as we explained the situation fully to you and gave you honestly the reasons for all our actions you would understand and support us. And so it has turned out to be, as my tour has shown. Now the future will not be easy. Far from it. We still have to get rid of the remaining deficit which again, unlike the Conservatives, we are not hiding from you. Our aim is that the nation shall be in balance by the end of this year and that we shall start to accumulate a surplus from 1967 onwards. This will then make the pound strong and secure and it will enable us to repay the money which had to be borrowed to finance the Conservative deficit.

We must at the same time achieve a faster and a greater rise in productivity: we also need greater efficiency in the management and organisation of our industry: and we must have greater flexibility in the way we use our manpower together with the ending of all out of date restrictive practices in industry. The Government, after consultation and mostly with the agreement of all in industry, has embarked already on a large range of new policies that will bring about this long term and permanent improvement in Britain's position.

The Conservatives left us with another major problem. Some regions of England were over-strained by the amount of industrial activity going on; while in other areas we were wasting their resources and had large numbers of their men and women out of work. This has led also to the disruption of life in those neglected areas because so many of the younger and the more active people were forced to leave home in order to find work in the busier areas. But already we have brought about a quite dramatic change in the fortunes of Scotland, Wales and of the North of England. As we saw on our tour, unemployment has been greatly reduced and new industries are now opening up. It was quite clear we have brought new hope and a good deal of happiness to the people who have lived so long in those neglected parts of our country. Because of the years which the Conservatives wasted we have to speed up the major changes in industry which are so very essential.

Labour accepts that it is the Government's business to see that men and women who may be affected by these changes are enabled to meet them without the discomfort, the hardships or the cruelties which so marked previous periods of industrial change in Britain. That is why we are increasing so substantially the facilities for training and for retraining our people: why we are planning the phasing of the changes so that the new jobs become available as the old ones contract: and why we have also provided generous tax free compensation, based on years of service, for those who may become redundant and may have to move to other jobs.

There is one remaining critical key to the success of these industrial policies. We must end the inflationary spiral of prices chasing incomes and incomes chasing prices, each forcing the other up, and thereby reducing the value of our money at home and our competitive position abroad. This has been a standing feature of our life for a long time past. But the only remedy the Conservatives ever tried was through higher taxes, credit squeezes, heavy unemployment and wasted factories. This caused much human misery and, of course was a totally irrational waste of the very productive capacity we needed so much. And it always failed to solve the problem. Our first and successful effort was to get agreement and thereby establish the Prices and Incomes Board. This we did by last May. Our policy has, therefore, been operating for only ten months. Yet in that time we have not only maintained full employment: we have increased industrial activity and prices are being stabilised. As the figures published only this week show - since the policy started prices have risen by no more than four pence in the pound, whereas in the last ten months of the Conservatives' same period prices rose by exactly twice as much. And the situation is improving steadily all the time. Manufacturers and distributors are now not only consulting us about proposed price increases but in quite a number of important cases recently have been coming forward voluntarily with proposals to peg their prices for long periods ahead in accordance with our policy.

It was always clear to me that prices had to be the point at which the vicious circle should be broken. Claims for wages and salaries are clearly influenced by prices, as are profits and dividends. It is not surprising, therefore, that on the incomes side the going has been tougher but we must succeed with this too if our money is to keep its value. And therefore it is most encouraging that in recent months so many settlements have been made in line with the policy. The Government is determined to push on with this policy because it remains the only constructive way to deal with this very crucial problem. Our opponents denounce it as they denounce everything else we do. But they have no alternative to put in its place. You have already seen how a Labour government tackles the job. You have seen the kind of results that can be achieved even under the greatest of difficulties and pressures. Give us a good majority in the next parliament: support us afterwards - and Britain will continue to go ahead. So make sure of it. Vote Labour next Thursday.