15th April 1997

Synopsis
The major element of this broadcast is a Blair 'talking head', but this is 'framed' within a black and white sequence of a bull-dog (presumably representing Britain) with its master (ambiguously representing the Conservatives). As the bull-dog 'hears' Blair's claims about how Britain could be better the dog gradually becomes more wakeful, finally breaking his chain and running off into the sunset.

VOICE-OVER:
As Britain approaches the end of the century we have been with the same masters now for eighteen years. We still have the talent, the skills, the inventiveness that we've always had - probably more so - but in a rapidly changing world we seem somehow to have lost our sense of purpose.
Now someone has emerged who is determined to give it back to us. He is the most talked about politician of his generation. They've called him everything: from Bambi to union basher; from public opinion courter to autocrat. But one thing is undeniable - in three short years his energy and leadership have transformed his party. What can he do for Britain?

TONY BLAIR:
Look the Tories didn't get everything wrong in the eighties, let's just be honest about that, admit it. But Britain can be better, we can make this country better than it is.
The Tories today are no longer the party of low taxes. The fact is they broke their word on tax, they raised taxes twenty-two times. Ordinary families have had massive tax rises under the Conservatives, the largest in peace-time history. Now I don't want to add to the burden of those families, they're hard-working. I'd like to see them get their tax burden down that's why we said that we're not going to raise the basic or top rate of income tax.

Ask yourself this question: if these Tories get back in for another five years, will we even have a National Health Service in the way that we've known it, and grown up with it? Now we've got to rebuild the National Health Service, and as a start we will spend a hundred million pounds by cutting that bureaucracy, and putting it into cutting waiting lists.

Why should people in this country have to put up with these levels of crime? The fear, the abuse, the hassle elderly people often afraid to go out of their own homes, sometimes afraid to be in their own home. The Labour party will take on this issue in every single aspect of it. Tough on crime, tough on the causes of crime.

I'm a British patriot, and I want the best out of Europe for Britain, and we need a government that is going to lead in Europe shape Europe, not just follow along behind the Europe that's been shaped by others, and a divided Conservative party with weak leadership fighting itself cannot fight for Britain.

Education is the future for this country. If we don't give our kids the right education they don't succeed, Britain doesn't succeed. That's why I've said, for a Labour government, its top three priorities: education, education, education. And again we can make a start, for example by reducing class sizes for all five six and seven year olds in our primary schools to thirty or under. That we will do in the five years of a Labour government.

Britain can be better. We can make this country better than it is, and I am not going to promise anything that I can't deliver, but I do tell you that today's Labour party, transformed as it is with the strength of leadership and the strength of unity behind it, can make this country better.

VOICE-OVER:
After eighteen years of weak leadership, incompetence and broken promises Britain deserves better. Give Tony Blair your mandate on May the first and let him give Britain back its sense of purpose.
