5th October 1964

SHIRLEY WILLIAMS:

Prosperity. That's the main theme of the Conservatives in this Election campaign. Of course we're better off. Practically every country in the world is better off than it was a few years ago. But we haven't been given these things, we've had to work for them. Work for them by doing extra overtime, work for them by both husbands and wives going out to work and get a lot of them by running up a big hire purchase debt. Yes, there are plenty of things in the shops if you've got the money to pay for them.

We bought this basket of shopping today in London. Just a basket of ordinary groceries, bread, milk, butter, meat. And this is what it cost us. This is the shopping list - two pounds, four shillings and five pence. A year ago exactly those same items would have cost us one pound, nineteen shillings and six and a half pence. But now one year later they cost two pounds, four shillings and five pence. I'm going to speak to one of the men who knows most about food prices in this country - Lord Sainsbury - and see what he has to say about it. Lord Sainsbury, from your own experience do you find that food prices are going up?

LORD SAINSBURY:

They are definitely dearer than this time a year ago. I estimate one shilling and three pence in the pound.

SHIRLEY WILLIAMS:

And what do you think that we can do about it?

LORD SAINSBURY:

Well I think for example we can improve marketing. Take vegetables, there can be set up more producer co-operatives and by such means we can lessen the gap between what the grower gets and what the housewife pays. And then in manufactured foods, I would like to see set up a watch-dog price commission that had the power to compel companies to reveal their costs, to see how these costs were built up and I believe if that was done it would act as a very effective brake on what I would describe as socially irresponsible price rises.

SHIRLEY WILLIAMS:

So if there was a sudden jump in prices the Price Commission would come in and investigate the reason?

LORD SAINSBURY:

Exactly.

SHIRLEY WILLIAMS:

Prices are bad enough, but the weekly rent, the monthly mortgage payment are the first charge on any family budget and these have gone up the very most of all.

MICHAEL STEWART:

We know what land prices can do to rents, rates, mortgages. Recently a Council had to pay for every person it re-housed from some slums, one thousand pounds per person for land alone. Ever since the Tories repealed Labour's Act of 1947 Councils pay profiteers' prices. Houses are dearer, rents up, rates up. Labour will buy land needed for building at a fair price and not a profiteer's price. Now let's take some examples. Do you pay rent to a private landlord? If you were de-controlled by the Rent Act you might at any time get four weeks notice to quit. If you're still controlled, remember that while the Rent Act is law, a Minister can make an order and you would be de-controlled and your security gone. Then those who are buying their homes know the burden of high interest. If you're hoping to buy you see as well house prices forced up by dear land. That is why Labour will provide in the future mortgages at lower rates. Or are you waiting on a Council List for something better than a home you can just fit in to and never enjoy?

Between 1953 and 1963 the Tories cut in half the number of Council homes built every year. We shall reverse this policy. Or is yours a home without a bath, hot water, separate toilet? Two years ago Labour stated its plan for giving councils power to modernise if the landlord will not. Recently the Tories have begun to echo our policy. But it's the same all the time at every point. As the Election approached the Tories began to talk of doing something about land, something to help the owner-occupier. They have had thirteen years in which to act. We need new policies and a new government that believes in those policies.

KENNETH ROBINSON:

The people who are most cruelly hit by prices that keep on going up are, of course, the elderly, the pensioners. Two million of them, one out of every four, have to go to the National Assistance Board to get enough each week not to live on, but to buy the barest essentials for existence. Nearly a million more qualify for National Assistance but for reasons which seem good to them don't choose to apply. If you happen to be ill as well as old, then you have to scrape together the money for prescription charges as well, week after week. We believe that taxing the sick is just about the meanest way a government can raise money and that's one reason why Labour will get rid of these charges once and for all and find the twenty odd million pounds to meet the cost. We've poverty enough in Britain today, especially amongst pensioners, to make the Tory boast of an affluent society sound to them like a bitter mockery. There's no need in a prosperous Britain for these forgotten pockets of misery and a Labour Government will tolerate them no longer.

How do we aim to do away with this poverty in old age? We intend to bring in an incomes guarantee to replace the National Assistance supplement. Under this system every pensioner and those on sickness or unemployment benefit will get their supplement not by going to the Board but from the Post Office as of right. On October the fifteenth you will be choosing between our proposals for ending poverty in old age and the Conservative's donation to the older pensioner, which can only mean that those under say seventy-five, or seventy in the case of women, get something less. I often think of another group of forgotten fellow citizens. The unmarried woman, perhaps going out to work to support an aged mother, coming home tired out to look after her, never getting a holiday. She gets little fun and little consideration. By helping the old we can at least ease her burden a little and give her some hope of security when she too is old; or will she, if the Conservatives have their way, she'll be forced to wait till she's 70 for Sir Alec's little donation.

RICHARD CROSSMAN:

But how much can the nation afford to spend each year, not only on schools but on pensions and on all the other social services? Of course it's perfectly right and proper to ask that question and I'm going to answer it this evening. But I want to say something first. The Conservatives talk a lot about the austerity and the rationing of those early post-war years under the Labour Government. What they never call attention to is the austerity and rationing which still exist in affluent Britain today. There's not much doubt about the austerity of the lives of the old age pensioner dependent on National Assistance, and as for rationing - well what about the government's attitude to school building? This year for example, the local authorities submitted school building programmes worth one hundred and seventy million pounds and every school in that programme was absolutely essential or it wouldn't have been included. But the Minister cut them back from one hundred and seventy million pounds to fifty million pounds - in fact he forbade the Councils to build two-thirds of the schools they desperately needed and which they could build if they hadn't been prevented from doing so. I call that rationing even if another name is used today. And I'm not surprised that Mr Hogg has suppressed the official report on the state of school buildings submitted to him over a year ago.

But even without it we know quite a lot. We know that half our Primary Schools were built in the Victorian age, that nearly half of them have no inside lavatories, that nearly half of them have no playing fields, that two-thirds have no proper science accommodation and that three-quarters have virtually no library. Yes, it's a strange world we live in. Any company which wants to build for profit, which wants to build luxury flats, offices, bingo palaces, no matter what, is completely unrationed by this Conservative government. Yet local authorities each year are forbidden to do the essential school building, without which nearly half our children are now being denied a fair chance in life. And the government's attitude to the teacher shortage is just as puzzling. It was twenty years ago that forty was fixed as the maximum size for a class in a Primary School and today one child in five is still being taught in classes of forty in this country. Despite all the government's boasts this situation isn't going to get better, it's going to get worse if these people stay in office. So that by 1970 under a Tory government nearly half our children in Primary Schools will be being taught in classes of over forty.

Now that seems to us intolerable, so we've worked out an emergency plan for dealing with the teacher shortage, for recruiting far more young teachers, for winning back more married teachers, to get to part-time work. We know the plan will cost money but we believe we can't afford to postpone the education of our children. So I come back to this question of cost - how much can the Nation afford. Well, it depends on how much the nation is earning. What we can afford if we double the present rate of economic expansion will be far more than what we are affording now when we're expanding slowly and every three years production is being virtually halted by stop go stop. Our plans for raising the old age pensioners above the National Assistance level, for abolishing prescription charges, for building more schools, for training more teachers, all these plans are based on one single assumption - that we can and we must double the rate of expansion we've had for these last thirteen years under Conservative rule. And if anybody tells me that this can't be done by the British people, I reply that's what our neighbours in Europe have been doing for years and we're convinced - give Britain the chance, we can do it too.