23rd May 2001

Synopsis
This PEB is presented in the form of a film trailer.

The voice-overs accompany the following images:

VOICE 1:
Just when you thought it was safe again, they're back.

a subway in which photographs of Margaret Thatcher, Norman Lamont, John Major, Nigel Lawson and Kenneth Clark are scattered;
a film poster - 'Towering Interest Rates' - Hague and Portillo outside a burning building;	image	VOICE 2:
From the people who brought you 'Economic Disaster: the Tory Years', comes a series of sequels even more terrifying - 'Towering Interest Rates', 'The Reposessed',and now in a new Tory production,'Economic Disaster 2'.

a second film poster - 'The Reposessed: No-one is safe from spiralling interest rates' - Hague and Portillo stand with arms outstretched like zombies;	image
a third film poster -'Economic Disaster II'.	image
We then cut to shadowy figures seen through an office window with the caption: 'Tory H.Q. 1989-93':

VOICE 2:
You watched heartless and incompetent Tory politicians hatch a reckless plan that led to misery for millions.

A black shadow sweeps across a cityscape, we see panicking crowds (just as in an 'alien invasion' sci-fi movie). These scenes are accompanied by stark captions reading 'Terror', 'Misery' and 'Black Wednesday 1992'.
 
VOICE 2:
You gasped in horror as the Tory shadow of disaster fell across the nation. No city, town or home was safe. People ran to avoid being caught in its devastating path. Yet it was still to unleash the full force of its fiscal fury. The Tory ecomonic policy was dangerously, catastrophically out of control.


We see miserable workers leaving a factory and the caption 'Unemployment hits 3 million'.
 
We see a family forced to leave their home and the captions '1.5 million in negative equity' and '400,000 people lost their homes'. 
 
We see a shop front being boarded up and the caption '1,000 businesses went bust every week.
Shots of deserted and gloomy looking hospitals and schools are accompanied by the caption: 'Remembered in all too vivid Torycolour'.  image image image
The final sequence shows the subway again and Hague and Portillo from the 'Economic Disaster II' film poster as Mr Boom and Mr Bust.


VOICE 2:
Introducing Mr Boom and Mr Bust ...

VOICE 1:

.. whose policies could bring you home repossessions, fifteen percent interest rates, and twenty billion pounds of public service cuts in 'Economic Disaster 2'.


Don't let it come to a home, business, hospital or school near you. Only you can stop it on Thursday June the seventh.

VOICE 1:
It would have been funny if it hadn't been so tragic. The Tory shadow fell first on businesses, destroying jobs. And then it came for your homes. Families were suffering as this Tory economic disaster raged uncontrollably onward. The Tory disaster you thought you had banished forever lurks just around the corner. They threaten to bring it all back.

CAPTION:

Don't go back
Vote Labour
on Thursday June 7th	image
