2nd April 1992

OLD WOMAN:

I voted Margaret Thatcher in. I thought that being a woman that she'd know how to run a country, but it's just gone from bad to worse in my estimation and I just think it's time for a change.

MAN:

I think I've had doubts for a number of years erm about the Tories, but I think it all culminated erm last year in the sense that erm one particular highlight was last year's Labour party conference when I actually said to my wife that the time had come when I actually agreed with everything that the front bench of the Labour party were saying from the platform at conference, and I think that that was almost a blinding flash.

JOHN SMITH:

It's time to get Britain out of recession and start building a strong economy. Two and a half weeks ago I presented Labour's budget to the British people. At its heart is an immediate one billion pound programme for economic recovery. Investment in housing and transport, jobs and skills will get Britain out of recession this year but the investment we make today will also create prosperity that lasts.

MAN:

I just feel that there is a need for some change I just feel that what the Tories have done so far has gone so desperately wrong that it does need to be sorted and I think and I hope that the Labour party will help me.

GORDON BROWN:

It's time to give industry real incentives to invest and that's exactly what our budget for recovery will do. I want Britain to be the industrial leader of the new Europe - top of the league for technology training and industrial success. That means we need a government working with industry just as our competitors do to build the skills, upgrade our technologies and ensure that goods invented in Britain are manufactured here too, so that throughout the nineties and beyond Made in Britain is the guarantee of quality and standards right across the world.

TONY BLAIR:

It's time to give our young people the qualifications they need and through our new three hundred million pounds skills fund enable adults to update and upgrade their skills throughout their working lives. It's time to give the unemployed the chance to retrain or work in their local communities - a workforce of quality encouraging the talents of each for the good of all: that's how a modern economy succeeds where you, your children, everyone can develop their potential to the full.

MAN:

Well the lack of spending's chronic.  The I mean the school itself is brilliant and er you couldn't ask for better teachers or nursery staff but it's just the resources they have to work with. The parents are constantly raising money, and for essentials not for luxuries. Er last year the parent body paid for new carpets throughout the school which was over a thousand pounds worth, er they've supplied computers for all the classrooms, they do a lot of book sponsoring, er just today there've been a cake stall raising funds for the school - it's all for buying essential equipment.

WOMAN:

In fact I tend to sort of see the Tories having a sort of jumble sale mentality towards education, em feeling that oh well whatever money we haven't got for it the parents can raise themselves by having a few jumble sales.

JACK STRAW:

It's time to invest in all our children. We will invest an extra six hundred million pounds in our schools over the next two years and raise educational standards. We shall create another twenty five thousand nursery education places for three and four year olds. We'll tackle the shortage of school books by guaranteeing ten pounds for new books for every school child and we'll cut class sizes so that children get the personal attention they need.

OLD WOMAN:

After what Lamont said that unemployment is good for the country, well it's not good for the people, it needs a caring government, a Labour government.

BRYAN GOULD:

We will get rid of the poll tax. We will introduce fair rates related to people's ability to pay. The Conservatives council tax will in fact be a property poll tax. Compared with the council tax our fair rates scheme will save the average family one hundred and fourteen pounds.

WOMAN:

I don't think the Conservative government care erm about the lower paid or the people who are struggling, I don't. I think they just say tough hard luck

LABOUR WOMAN:

It's time to make sure that women and men can look after their children and earn a good living too. We'll help working mothers by creating fifty thousand new child-minding and out of school care places. We'll give tax relief on employer assistance with child-care. We'll give every three and four year old a right to nursery education and we'll help to expand the opportunity for part time work by making sure that every employee has the same legal protection whatever hours they work.

MARGARET BECKETT:

It's time to give Britain's families the support they get in other European countries. Labour will increase child benefit by one hundred and twenty seven pounds a year. For a family with two children we will raise pensions by an extra eight pounds a week for a couple, five pounds for a single person with the full increase going to everybody. By introducing fair taxes and raising benefits we will make eight out of ten families better off.

WOMAN:

When it comes to health you can't mess with people's health.  That should be, that is something which should be natural like going to drink a glass of water.  You should be able to go to the hospital and get treated and not have to wait hours and hours to be seen to - that should be something that should come first.

DOCTOR:

I have a deep commitment to the national health service and I feel that unfortunately the people up there haven't got that same commitment, and that is the underlying problem for me that year on year there's been underfunding in my part of the NHS year after year.

GP:

as a GP I'm concerned about the move towards a market system which I don't think has any part to play in the provision of a health service.  A a market system means increased competition and increased competition almost always leads to reduction in costs, cutting corners, and I feel ultimately er in the health service will lead to cutting corners to the extent that patients' er lives and their health in general will be put at risk.

DOCTOR:

Er it's going to put barriers between patients. Erm I can image that a patient might come in and and you say well I don't really want to refer you to this operation and the patient's going to say is that your accountant that's speaking or is that you as a doctor that's speaking.

DOCTOR:

And patients don't seem to matter any more.  If anything all the er managers these days try to do is they're forced into a position where they have to shut people up who talk about patients.

HARRIET HARMAN:

It's time for a health policy to keep people healthy as well as a National Health Service to treat people when they're ill. We'll strengthen screening by bringing back free eye tests and we'll make sure that food is properly labelled and insist on high standards for school meals and we'll cut the death toll from cancer by banning tobacco advertising and helping people to stop smoking.

ROBIN COOK:

Labour created the NHS we're proud of the way it has served Britain, that's why we won't let it be privatised we'll bring back the hospitals that have opted out. We'll raise standards through a new quality commission and we'll start to tackle underfunding with an extra thousand million pounds over our first two years, that way we can recruit more nurses and keep open more beds for patients. It's time for the strong NHS we all need - let's make this election a referendum on the National Health Service.

MAN:

It's a different Labour party to the one thirteen years ago.  It's a different country, it's a different economy, and we have Europe to look forward to and I feel that the government that we have now is failing us and it is time for a change.

KINNOCK:

On April the ninth there's a choice to be made between fear and hope. Instead of recession and unemployment we'll build a firm future of recovery and economic strength. Instead of the constant experiments and underfunding in education we'll increase investment and raise standards in schools. Instead of a privatised health service we'll ensure that everyone has the security of a high quality National Health Service free at time of need. It's time for all of us to work together to transform Britain from the country it's become to the successful country we know it can be. It's time to get Britain working again. It's time for change. It's time for Labour.
