2nd October 1964

ANTHONY WEDGEWOOD BENN:

The Conservative message in this Election is really very simple. Everything's all right. There's nothing to worry about. Leave it to us. To get this message across they've spent millions of pounds, in hired advertising agencies, paid actors to appear on posters, had hand-picked street interviews, the whole apparatus of advertising normally used for selling soap or detergents or washing powders or tooth paste. But in our hearts we know this picture of Britain is not true.

GEORGE BROWN:

Now there's no point in beating about the bush any longer. We've got to face facts and face facts now. This country is lurching towards the biggest economic crisis since the war. Britain is losing over one million pounds every day. The gap between what we export and what we import has been widening for the last fifteen months and the very latest figures show that this gap is growing faster and faster. This is a crisis which affects every single one of us. If the present trend continues it will mean that our jobs, our wages, our hire-purchase payments, our mortgage rates, are all in jeopardy. Now I know that Mr Maudling half denies it but then the Tory Leaders denied that there was a crisis in 1955 and after that we had the Credit Squeeze; they denied that there was a crisis in 1960 after which we had the infamous Pay Pause. But the situation to-day is far more serious than either of those examples. All of us in Britain and especially the Conservatives must face this fact for until we do there is no hope of our being able to do anything about it. However, what is even more worrying than the economic situation itself is the fact that the Conservatives still pretend that nothing is really the matter and that nothing should be done. Conservative Leaders in a last desperate attempt to cling to office are holding this country to ransom for Party political reasons. This is both blind and irresponsible. For the next government, whichever Party it is, will have to pay very dearly indeed for this mistake. There is one over-riding reason why we are now faced with this crisis. The Conservatives throughout their thirteen years have refused to plan - our roads, houses, schools, hospitals are utterly inadequate for this reason. And abroad, we are falling behind the other industrial countries of the world. They are exporting far more than we are. To-night I want to show you not only what is wrong but also, and this is far more important, how the Labour Government will plan the new Britain.

Examples of bad planning are not hard to find. Look around you at the long delays, frustrating waits, all our cities seem to be jammed with cars. And it's the same on holiday too - long waits, heavy lorries on the roads, many of them dangerous, no transport planning here. Motorway construction - too slow and badly planned as well. For the railways it's been another story - the axe, the axe wielded by Dr. Beeching, hundreds of stations to be closed, thousands of miles of line that could have played a useful part in economic development.

No social costing here, just pounds shillings and pence. And for those people who really could be fitted into new towns, a government failure to plan ahead. For the Tories it's been the Rent Act - thousands of people evicted, Mr Henry Brooke the Minister responsible. Those who are looking for homes in our new towns find the same signs everywhere Offices to be let, to be let, to be let. It's the same with education - some beautiful new comprehensive schools built but many other schools in appalling condition - the figures Mr Hogg won't release. Bad planning. Over-sized classes. All this could have been anticipated if someone had looked ahead. The worst example - our old industrial areas, worst victims of stop and go, left to decay and only last year eight hundred thousand men out of work because of stop and go. Bad planning once again.

WILLIAM ROSS:

Nowhere is it more clear the consequences of the absence of planning and real government than what has happened in Scotland during these past thirteen years. We've seen Scotland become a land of diminishing opportunity. In thirteen Tory years we've lost three hundred and seventy thousand people; they've left Scotland - mainly young men of talent, skill and craft, crowding into the already over-crowded South and the Midlands. This can't go on. If Scotland is going to be able to play its part in the economic expansion that Labour plans, we must have these opportunities. Between 1961 and .1963 there wasn't an increase in jobs in Scotland for men and for boys, there was an actual decrease of thirty-three thousand at a time when the Tories boast of having created a million new jobs in Britain for men. The actual facts are stark - they're grim for Scotland and only Labour planning will improve the position and give us the forty thousand jobs a year that we really need. Their housing - it's a tragic story. In 1953 thanks to Labour Government's planning, they were able to build thirty-nine thousand houses; last year it was down to 28,000 - a loss over these years to Scotland of one hundred thousand much needed houses. Their social policies and their employment policies have been such as to deny us what we think are our rights in respect of employment and social conditions. But it will take more than thirteen years of Toryism to quench the spirit of the people of Scotland. We will come through and we will play our part in the New Britain under a Labour Government.

LADY MEGAN LLOYD GEORGE:

Wales with all her magnificent potential has not been able to develop her own resources or take a full part in the British economy in the last thirteen years. Under Tory planning we've had uncontrolled expansion in the South and a slow steady tragic drift of young people from Wales. Now unemployment has gone down it's true. But de-population has not and this means that there is still a serious shortage of jobs in Wales. It is indeed another form of unemployment. How can we reverse this migration? I'm convinced that we can under the Labour plan to induce industrialists to come to Wales, to improve our transport system and Mr Marples has been in reverse and has chosen Wales as one of the places for some of his major closures. Now at last we are to have Welsh people planning for Wales with a Secretary of State for Wales, a voice at last in the Cabinet of Great Britain.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

The policy of stop and go has also had a serious effect on British industry. With me are two men who are actually concerned with running large business firms. One of them is a Chairman, the other a Managing Director. What do you think of government economic policy at present?

WILFRED BROWN:

The point is this, that every Manager is a professional planner whether he accepts the term or not. And we Managers have to predict the future of the economy so that we can order our investment plans for increased expansion and all the rest of it. Now if there's no government plan, and particularly if the government is stop, go, stop go, our plans are nearly always wrong. Now if there's a broad industrial plan, we've a much better chance of optimising output and increasing exports and all the rest of the things that the country demands of us.

PETER PARKER:

I entirely agree. I mean the fifties have proved we've been fumbling with the management of the economy. I think industry, both employers and Trade Unions, deserve some credit in trying to persuade the Tories of the importance of planning in a reliable and steady way. We have got to do our jobs, have a frame-work in which you can get on serving the community, making a fair profit if you do it that way, but the one thing that we are most afraid of is topless management.

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

May I put this to you because it's sometimes said that if you do have real planning as Labour intends, industry won't co-operate with you. Is that your experience?

WILLIAM BROWN:

Those who say that are political scaremongering. I don't think many say it because a manager's job is to make his business prosperous and to optimise output and all the rest of it. Well is it conceivable that a manager would ruin his own business because he didn't like the political complexion of the government? Managers are really not quite so foolish.

PETER PARKER:

Well, a manager is not doing a political job. But I think all managers do appreciate that politics affect their business decisively and this is the first point. I think the second point is that industry's job is to work with the government of the day, to serve the community and the national interest and I believe that industry is going to try to do that but to do it, it must be sure that the strategic objectives are going to be firm and firmly supported by a government that believes in planning.
GEORGE BROWN:

So it is clear that the essential issue at the Election is which of the two Parties do you trust to change and modernise Britain. And make no mistake, without change, without modernisation, we can't get the expansion that we need to carry out those programmes which are put before you. Now which Party do you think will change all this. Labour - which created the Health Service, fought steadily for the Welfare State or the Tories who fought against that and now grudgingly talk of giving donations to old age pensioners? Mr Maudling says that the whole economic situation will come right on the night provided he has an incomes policy. But where are the plans to secure this real incomes policy? Where are the plans to control land prices, to control profits, where are the plans for tax reforms to stop fiddling, where are the plans to modernise and energise British industry?

There are none and without planning, without change, the Conservatives clearly couldn't possibly carry out any of their precious promises. We in the Labour Government are going to plan for two main objectives - for efficiency and for prosperity. This country is losing ground to the other industrial countries in the world simply because we are so inefficiently led. Since the beginning of this year more people have started working. That should have meant more production, but it hasn't. The Labour Government will reverse this trend. We cannot just trust to luck and hope that things will turn out well in the end. The last thirteen years have shown that things simply do not work out that way. We can no more hope that the economy will expand without our doing anything about it than we could hope to have a pretty garden just by sitting back and watching the weeds come up.

But efficiency isn't everything, and it would be a dull and stodgy country if it were. We shall also plan to increase prosperity in order that everyone, not just a few privileged people, can get a fair share of the increased wealth that this country can produce. We shall ensure that the land speculators do not grow rich by making house buyers pay huge sums for their homes. We shall plan so that the North of England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland, do not steadily decline while the South-East is filled to overflowing. And as a consequence of doing this the Labour Government will have created the climate for a real incomes policy. The Conservatives have failed to achieve this because they simply mean limiting wages and salaries - they refuse to deal with profits, dividends, rents, land prices. Labour's incomes policy will include profits as well as wages, it will also include rents and land prices - this is why we have the complete backing of the Trade Unions, without which no incomes policy can succeed.

Once we have got a comprehensive national plan then we shall be able to ensure the steady expansion of the economy which is so essential for our increased prosperity. The Conservatives accept the state that this country is in as being inevitable and indeed they appeal to you not to change it. But we know that not only can things not stay as they are, our problems can and must be solved. Britain can still be the most successful industrial country in the world and with a Labour Government and with your active participation it will be. Britain has the skill and the experience as well as the capacity for work. To succeed in our task getting Britain moving again, we must get rid of all the tired complacency. Britain has a vast job on its hands. It's going to be exciting work and it'll often be difficult, but it's a challenge we cannot ignore. When you decide on October the fifteenth for a change, then together we can get on with the job.