21st February 1974

ROBERT MELLISH:
Whoever wins next Thursday has an appalling job to do. You know what the problems are, now how will Labour tackle them? With me tonight are four young candidates who, when elected, will be helping to solve these problems. Neil Kinnock, from Wales, how best can we get this country out of the industrial unrest that we face today?

NEIL KINNOCK:
Well first Bob, in the day after we are elected we settle with the miners, we settle with the whole industry, and when the miners go bank to work Britain goes back to work. Then we can get down to the problems of solving the conflict in industry, we can bring industrial peace to industrial relations, we do that by getting rid of the Industrial Relations Act by introducing the Employment Protection Act which will give real security to British workers, by introducing the Industrial Democracy Act which will give industrial control to the people who actually produce the goods in industry. Then with our new conciliation and arbitration service we're going to put out the fires of conflict on the shop floor where they start. And the standing commission on incomes will see to it that we have a fair distribution of incomes - all incomes throughout the whole country, regardless where people get their incomes from. But central to Labour's economic strategy is the voluntary incomes policy based on consent and assent between trade unions and the Government. And that means that when workers see their food prices subsidised, when they see those pensions going up, when they see their rents frozen, they will want to join a compact with a just government. Len Murray has been trying to do that for the last three or four months. Every time he has tried it the last government have rejected it. We can't afford to have industrial warfare in Britain, we will bring industrial peace on the basis of a compact on the basis of a partnership, we will take the poison out of industrial relations.

MELLISH:
Ann let's talk about Labour's policies on waging inflation. Every housewife wants to know what Labour's going to do and how they are going to do it.

ANN MALLALIEU:
Well leading on from what Neil Kinnock has just said, going round in my area I've found ordinary men and women everywhere determined that the one thing they want is to get Britain prosperous again. And in order to do that they frankly are prepared to hold back, not to push wage demands, providing they are sure that they've got a government that will do its utmost to try and check inflation. Now no government could say that it's going to be able to stop prices rising completely, but what a Labour Government can, and will do, is this. Firstly we can subsidise those items which are essential in every family budget - things like, bread and eggs and milk and so on. Those are the things which all of us have to buy and when the prices rise it's the people at the bottom end of the wage structure who suffer most. We already have the Price Commission, which is supposed to be controlling the shop prices, supermarket prices. Well in the last few weeks we've heard announcements of some of the profits made by the food companies. The Price Commission simply isn't doing that strongly enough, and a Labour Government is going to give that Commission teeth to do just that. But there is something else which a Labour Government will do, which I think is vitally important, and that concerns the Common Market because at the present time, under the present conditions as they've been negotiated, we are having to pay a great deal more for food in some areas, simply because of the arrangements that we made. For instance, beef is being kept artificially high at the present time in order to protect farmers overseas whose costs of production are higher. Now I don't think that's fair, we were never given a choice about whether we went into the Market, and that is something that a Labour Government will do, we'll try and re-negotiate those terms and then in any event we'll come back to you and ask whether you want to remain members at all.

MELLISH:
Jimmy Sillars from Scotland. I suppose one of the big issues that have occurred during the election is North Sea oil. Jimmy, talk of Labour's policies on this.

JIM SILLARS:
It's a question of common sense Bob. Our policy is based on the common sense principle that every nation should own its own natural fuel and energy resources. Other countries do it, we believe our country should do it also. We own our own coal, our own natural gas, our own nuclear power, and now the Labour Party says that we should own our own oil. Now there are two sides - on the exploration and production side - Labour will take public participation in exploration and production and employ the expertise of companies. But when we land the oil in the United Kingdom which is really the very important point, it will be in the nation's ownership and will be able to be used for the benefit of the whole nation. When we do this Bob, in nuclear energy as you well know, when we build a nuclear power station we employ private industry to construct it, we get the profits and the dividends as they are entitled to do, but when that power station's built and pumps out energy, it's the nation's energy and it's used for the benefit of the nation, and we will employ the same policy attitude in oil as we do in nuclear powers. Now this leaves us the revenue question. And I believe the revenues must be used for the benefit of Scotland and that's part of our policy, that we're not greedy in the Labour Party in Scotland or south of the border and we want to see the potential wealth of oil used for the benefit of all of the people in the United Kingdom.

MELLISH:
Thanks Jimmy. One of the greatest human problems of all is housing and anyone associated with this problem knows of the thousands that are crying out for a home. Now Helene, the Labour Party's policy, what about that?

HELENE MIDDLEWEEK:
Well we've got policies on both sets of problems in housing, on the cost of housing and the provision of housing. We've seen in the last few years house prices go sky-high - they've doubled. We've seen mortgages reach eleven percent so people who'd worked out that they could just afford their repayments on seven or eight percent are now being stretched and stretched to try and meet increased repayments. We've seen rents deliberately raised under the Housing Finance Act. In the council sector, they are going to be raised again by fifty pence on April the first and again by fifty pence on October the first, unless the Labour Party gets back into office and repeals the Housing Finance Act as we are pledged to do. The other big problem we've got on the cost of housing is the cost of mortgages. Now we've seen this week bank profits reach a record high at a time when mortgages are also at a record high and those profits are a direct result of high mortgage rates. I think those profits, and the Labour Party thinks those profits, ought to be ploughed back into bringing the interest rate down, and seeing that young couples can afford a home of their own. But to afford a home of their own there's also go to be a home there for them to live in, and we've got three million people in this country living in slums or grossly overcrowded conditions, and we've got a house building programme that reached a record low last year, the worst since 1959. We can't afford to do that, we've got to tackle the key issue in housing which is the issue of land, and the Labour Party stands for the public ownership of development land, and that's nothing to do with taking people's back gardens away from them. That's nothing to do with taking farms and agricultural land, that's without saying there's a certain amount of land in our cities we've got to decide as a community what we use that land for. We can either use it for office blocks that stay empty but that make profits for the people who own them. Or we can decide as a society that every man, woman and child in this country ought to have a roof over their heads and a decent standard of housing. We can decide that we are going to put profits first or that we are going to put people first, the Labour Party would put people first in housing.

MELLISH:
Now you've heard the views from our young candidates on Labour's positive policies for a way out of a crisis. We must get Britain back to work, we need price controls and a new agreement with industry on wages. And the massive revenues from North Sea oil must be used for the benefit of the people and not the oil companies. We must channel funds into housing so that more houses are built and more cash is available for mortgages. Jobs and housing must come before speculative profits, and the rich must carry a fairer share of the burden. So there is a way out of our present crisis. And things are bad, and they are certainly worse than in 1964, but they are nowhere near as bad as 1945. So Labour can get us out of the mess. We did it in '45, we did it in 1964, and we shall do it again. We can do it because a Labour Government is fair, and it's a government that cares.