Monday 14th May 2001

Synopsis
On the soundtrack we hear Labour's campaign song: 'Lifted', by the Lighthouse People. The voice-over is accompanied by a montage of images of British life: people working and people at home; children playing; scenes from a hospital, a primary school and an old people's home; policemen and women; people in developing countries; Scottish and Welsh landscapes.

VOICE:

Has Britain changed since 1997?

A million more jobs. Two hundred and seventy-five thousand young people have found a job with the new deal.

Britain's first ever minimum wage.

Maternity leave extended.

Up to an extra five hundred and twenty pounds a year for families with the children's tax credit.

Child benefit has been increased to fifteen pounds fifty for the eldest child.

The right to four weeks paid holiday.

A million children lifted out of poverty.

NHS investment lifted to record levels. Two hundred million pounds for cancer equipment and care. NHS waiting list reduced by a hundred thousand. Seventeen thousand extra nurses. Free eye tests for pensioners.

The best ever primary school results. An extra five hundred and forty pounds invested for every pupil. Smaller class sizes for four hundred and fifty thousand five, six and seven year olds.

Winter fuel payments introduced.

Free TV licences for over seventy-fives.

Pensions up. Five pound for single pensioners. Eight pound for pensioner couples per week.

Car crime down fifteen percent. Burglary down twenty one percent. Hand guns banned. Landmines banned.

The debt of poorest nations cut.

A Scottish parliament.

A Welsh assembly.

Good Friday agreement in Northern Ireland.

Highest employment ever.

Lowest long-term interest rates for thirty five years.

Low and stable mortgage rates delivered.

Ten p tax rate introduced and extended helping twenty five million people.

Britain's inflation the lowest for over thirty years.

A lot has been done, but there's still a lot more to do. So the work goes on. Vote Labour on Thursday June the seventh.

Call us on 08705 900 200. That's 08705 900 200 now.