1st June 1970

HAROLD WILSON:

A fortnight ago it was my responsibility to recommend that there should be a general election on June the eighteenth. And when you make your decision you will be deciding to whom the responsibility of government is to be entrusted. Your Labour Government has had the responsibility for five and a half years. And the test we have come through is that of making Britain strong, getting Britain out of the red into a strong surplus. Bringing Britain up-to-date, keen, vigorous, competitive in the world markets. Earning the respect of the world. We now have a surplus of five hundred millions on overseas trade. A position never previously achieved in the whole of Britain's long trading history. That is why we now are respected everywhere as being one of the strongest economies in the world. Many things we would all like to have done have had to take second place to the over-riding priority of making us strong. But despite pressures from home and abroad we have insisted on maintaining and improving Britain's standards of tolerance, compassion and stability. That is our achievement. On June the eighteenth you will decide between the Government and the Conservative alternative on three tests. How each has discharged the responsibilities of government. Whether this government or the men the Conservatives are putting forward will provide the team you want to guide Britain through the 1970's. And thirdly on policies. The government's proved policies, going forward, building on economic strength, or the Conservative alternative policies. Which of them measure up to the responsibility that you have the right to demand.

We can be proud of what we have achieved over five and a half years, when making Britain strong had to be our first priority. Britain today is a far more compassionate society than it was six years ago. For our old people, the widows, the disabled, the sick, we have done more than ever before. And for the young too. I am proud of what we have done, more than ever seemed possible, to bring about a real equality of opportunity for our children, ending the unfair segregation, the absurd segregation of children at the age of eleven plus. On the Health Service with new hospital building more than doubled. On housing, despite my very real disappointment because of economic conditions at home and abroad, hundreds of thousands more homes built in the past five and a half years than in any previous period in our history.

Now with an economic strength such as we have not known for very many years past - a strength we shall maintain - we can move much more quickly and confidently to improve the quality of our life, and the quality of our environment. We shall use that strength to increase the massive provision we have already made for improving social security. Our new Pensions Act, a fair deal for women, health and welfare, use that strength to improve our education, housing. For our greatly expanding roads programme, the modernisation of our decaying town and city centres. A new drive to make Britain not only a really great country to live in but a cleaner place to live in, dealing with the pollution of our rivers, the seas around our coasts, the atmosphere, and the nuisance of noise. Ensure that our economic strength is shared among all the nations and regions of Britain.

We shall strengthen still further the massive provision we are making to bring new industry, a new prosperity, more jobs, to the Development Areas, and intermediate areas, so long neglected by our predecessors. Vast areas of the country now entering the seventies with more hope and confidence than ever before. We shall use that strength to improve still further personal and family living standards - already higher than ever before - and to help others who need our help.

But what would happen to our strength if the five hundred millions surplus was to be handed over to the mend of the eight hundred millions deficit? You know the Conservative record in office. And they have been just as irresponsible in opposition. In these past five and a half years they have exploited for political purposes every difficulty we have faced. And all of these difficulties had deep roots in their years of neglect and indifference. Almost every action we have taken to strengthen Britain has been opposed - and exploited - by them. While we have been getting on with the job, they have been electioneering since 1966. Running Britain down at home and abroad. Exuberant only when Britain ran into economic difficulties, grudging even in their admissions when Britain was coming through to success. They resent the fact that you decided that Britain should have a Labour Government. With the Conservative record in government and opposition, we cannot afford to hand over our hard-won surplus to be frittered away by them. Everything we have fought to achieve would be thrown away by the irresponsible financial policies they are now proposing. Policies related not to the economic or social future of Britain, but to their hope of winning easy votes on a programme which adds up to an economic delusion. Not only do they try to win your votes by promising to tax less, they are after other votes by promising to spend more. One thousand five hundred million pounds of tax remissions.

Their own people criticise them for promises to increase government spending by one thousand million. No-one seriously believes that you can promise to cut taxes and spend more at the same time. No-one who has any experience of industry or finance or book-keeping, no housewife, who has her weekly budget to add up, is going to be taken in by this unscrupulous pretence that in this life you can get something for nothing. Financial irresponsibility, social irresponsibility too. Who is going to be taken in by the compassion, the care and the concern, they have put on for the election campaign? Where was their compassion, where was their concern, when there were people who needed that care and concern, when they had the power to help and refused to help? The widows, the old age pensioners, the disabled, poor families, the tenants of private landlords, the victims of Rachmanism, the millions who had the humiliation of National Assistance and now get their supplementary benefit as a right; people made redundant by change in industry. All these we have helped. They didn't help then. But the meaner approach of their new abrasive policies would mean making the lot of those dependent on the social services a great deal harder. worse, they would cut their standard of living, and hit millions of other families as well, by policies which are deliberately designed to push up the cost of living. Deliberately designed to increase food prices. Deliberately designed to increase taxes on everything that an average family has to buy. Deliberately designed to increase rents. All of this to make possible their policy of unfairly selective cuts in taxation for some.

They want to make law and order and the prevention of crime - real problems in themselves - the football of party politics. To deal with them they propose alien solutions imported from foreign countries where law and order are breaking down. Not here. The only part of the United Kingdom where law and order has been menaced is in Northern Ireland where the Tories have had control for half a century - and where we have had to intervene to guarantee an orderly - and a fair society. They propose to import alien ideas about the serious problems of industrial relations, from foreign countries whose record in strikes and stoppages is many times worse than our own. These doctrines have manifestly not worked in the countries of their origin. How can they work here and how can they give happiness and contentment?

Every leading democratic country in the world envies Britain for our tolerance, for our individual liberty, for our stability. These, backed by Britain's economic strength, provide the framework in which every individual, every family, can live their lives in their own way. That is why, as I have said, the decision the British people have to take, is a decision about responsibility. You have to judge on the records of men tested by the responsibilities of government, and the policies which will be put forward. And the reality behind those policies. Still more, you have to judge the purposes they seek to serve, their ideals, their objectives. And in judging these, you have to decide on whom you want to confer the responsibility - responsibility for guiding Britain in a difficult and fast-changing world during the next five years.