12th October 1964

SPEAKER NOT KNOWN:

Three days to go and before Harold Wilson speaks from Manchester, a few words from Lord Attlee.

LORD ATLEE:

I see Sir Alec Home says they wouldn't feel confident in meeting leading politicians from other countries unless they had an independent deterrent.  I never felt like that nor did Mr Ernest Bevin and of course Ernest Bevin was a great personality. As a matter of fact this idea of the independent deterrent is nonsense. The same order of things - the Conservatives under Neville Chamberlain on national defence. There was no such thing as national defence. You had to have collective security. Winston Churchill and I both said it without effect. And now today the idea that somehow we shall be stronger if we had a nuclear weapon is absolute nonsense. They cannot tell me of any possible occasion in which we ourselves independently should want to use a nuclear weapon or how you could use it us a threat. You have two enormous countries, Russia and the United States, they have the deterrent, it would be better if the deterrent was only in the hands of U.N.O. ... for the more ... nuclear weapons in other hands the more danger there is of their falling into the hands of some trigger-happy fool. You have France wanting it, China wanting it, kind of every self-respecting person must have their own bomb. Well if a man had any personality he could put across British policy without a nuclear bomb in his hand.

HAROLD WILSON:

This Election is about the standing of Britain in the world. When we vote on Thursday we're deciding the future of our country, we're deciding the well-being of our people and of our children, we're deciding whether we're going to go on trailing behind other countries or whether as we believe Britain can recapture the lead we once held amongst the nations of the world. We're tired of being pushed around. But if we're going to assert ourselves this means we must have economic strength at home, for if we stand still at home we stand still abroad. But it's not only a question of restoring a sense of economic purpose to our national affairs and getting Britain on the move again. On Thursday we shall be deciding whether we can make this country a country which cares, which can combine efficiency with new vigour in our economic life but also which can ensure that the prosperity of the nation is shared by every family.

Why is there a choice? There are deep differences in policies first. But more important there's a basic difference between the philosophy and approach of the two Parties, to the kind of society that we want to create. President Roosevelt said once "Better the occasional faults of a government living in the spirit of compassion then the consistent omissions of a government frozen in the ice of its own indifference". And the Labour Party which sprang from the people is concerned about people, people as individuals, people as families, their health, their happiness, the opportunity they have to develop their talents and live a full life.

Our opponents approach the problem of government in a much more materialist way. To them the supreme test is how well business is doing, how high is the level of profits, how are Stock Exchange prices doing. Because they believe in the old Victorian idea that the profit and loss account is the sole criterion of the national welfare. And this is one reason why we've had in these recent years a decline in the values on which our society is based. A feeling that the man who makes money, however he makes it, is more highly esteemed than the man who earns his money, producing for his fellow men or providing the necessary services on which a civilised society depends. In this election we're choosing a government for the next five years.

The Conservatives want us to have government by a closed and privileged circle, to have a government which will keep things as they are, which is content with second best, which will abdicate responsibility in favour of those who owe no sense of accountability to the national interest, whose only concern is with their own private gain. We reject this one-sided and selfish approach. We seek to create an open society in which all have a vital and vigorous part to play, in which life has colour and variety, but in which the pursuit of happiness is matched by a sense of purpose. We believe that government by the people must be by the whole people and you can't talk of political democracy if there's no economic democracy. When I fly the Atlantic in a jet plane, I want to know that the pilot of that aircraft is highly skilled at his job, concerned with the safety of his passengers. Frankly I don't care who his father was or whether he went to the right school, and if your father or mother or child has to face a major operation, all you care about is whether the surgeon known his job, you don't want to know if he mixes with the right circles or has the right friends.

And you know when it's a question of our strength and independence, we want to feel that those who are deciding what we produce, what we invest, or how we're going to crack open tough export markets, are men trained for the job - whether it's a job of production or a job of selling abroad. We're fighting for our lives in a world of tough professionals and we can't go on as we have been. Let's look at the two parties' philosophies against the issues with which we're faced because it's this fundamental approach that lies at the heart of all the issues that dominate this Election this week. Land prices, housing, the cost of living, pensions, education.

Take land prices. If you're clever enough to get hold of a piece of land which the ratepayers need for a school or a housing project and if you sell it to the community at an exorbitant profit, you're honoured as a smart operator and you know the Conservatives glory in a system which enables our urgent housing needs to be exploited by a handful of privileged men who have perhaps inherited vast landed possessions, or by speculators who've moved in and bought land in the hope of a quick profit. Millions have been made in these speculative deals and the cost comes out of our pockets. It's paid by your family when you come to pay your rent or your mortgage payment. We believe that the land of Britain should be used for the benefit of the people of Britain not for private profit. When new building pushes up land values the increase in value should come to the community and be used for the benefit of the whole community. That is why we're going to take urgently required building land into public ownership.

Or again take housing. Conservatives think of housing as a legitimate field for private profiteering. This explains their inhuman Rent Act which has put up rents to a record level. It has forced hundreds of thousands of families out of their homes and the Tories with their Rent Act have enabled unscrupulous landlords to exploit the housing shortage, even to the point of creating Rachmannism. We believe that the government should act to help owner-occupiers by lowering interest rates and of course help them by providing cheaper land. That families paying rent should be able to live in their homes without being held up to ransom by private landlords. So one of our first acts will be the repeal of the Rent Act. We shall restore security of tenure, we shall create machinery for fixing fair rents.

Then again, take rising prices. They've called off the fight against the abuse of monopoly power which Labour began with the Monopolies Act of 1948. And their concern for the profit of middle-men has meant that year by year the gap has been widening between what the farmer gets for his produce and what the housewife has to pay. To the Labour Party you know, the cost of living is not just a question of economic management, it's a matter of living or just barely existing, for old age pensioners and others living on small fixed incomes. The Conservatives' treatment of the pensioners reveals all the underlying meanness and selfishness of the "I'm all right Jack" society. Time after time they've rejected our demands for increased pensions and now with an Election they make a promise to increase the weekly pension by about half-a-crown a weak each year - less than the current rise in the cost of living. And Sir Alec Douglas Home talks on television of these pathetic increases in pensions as donations. But this is not a subject for charity. Old age pensioners are entitled to live in conditions of dignity and comfort as a right as members of our national family for whom they've done so much. This is why I pledge the Labour Government to urgent action to deal with this problem with a humanity that has been lacking. To ensure to each a guaranteed and adequate income on which our old age pensioners, widows and others can live, without the need to go cap in hand to the National Assistance.

It's the same with education. As democrats, as socialists, we believe in the right of every boy and girl to educational opportunity which will develop their talents to the full, develop their abilities to get the best out of life and to put the best into life. But that isn't all. We believe in Britain and in this ruthlessly competitive age in which we live, our best brains are our finest asset. We're faced with the formidable industrial and technological challenge from the Soviet Union and from other countries. This challenge has been dramatically underlined to-day by the new Soviet spaceship, and faced with this kind of challenge we can't as a nation afford to neglect the development of a single child.

Once again it's all a question of priorities and what we think is important. However dedicated a nation's teachers, they can't do the job they want to do if classes are over-crowded, as they are all over Britain. But teachers stand low in the Tory scale of values, much lower than many others who contribute nothing to the country's welfare. And you don't get fair educational opportunity either. In slum schools in these grim relics of the Victorian educational system, in which so many of our children still have to be taught. You don't get it either under a system of segregation in our schools where the eleven plus cuts off three-quarters of all our boys and girls from almost any hope of higher education. To deal with these problems we've put forward our ideas and plans for creating a new Britain. They say that it can't be done, that we can't afford it, that it's beyond our grasp. What they mean is that they can't do it, they won't do it and on the basis of the halting, limping, faltering Tory record of the past thirteen years, of course they're right. We mustn't try to achieve this programme they say, we might strain ourselves. You know this is a language of defeat. We believe this country can do it, we can do it if we get away from the sterile waste of stop go stop pay pause policy. If we get a new sense of urgency into industry, if we harness the tides of scientific and technological advance, if we can get both sides of industry to shed their addiction to out of date practices to which they cling because they fear the consequences of change. We've got to re-discover and recapture the spirit of adventure.

So this is the choice we face on Thursday. If you're content to settle comfortably into a standard of living which is rising not by as much as it ought to be rising, if you're content to see this country sink into a rut of cosy complacency, if you feel that we mustn't reach out to heights that are within our grasp, if you feel that as things are they must remain, if you think that Britain's role in the world depends upon our ancient monuments and nuclear posturing, if you're satisfied with the stop go stop see-saw which is a Tory substitute for real economic planning, then your choice is clear, you stick with the Tories. Lloyd George once said and President Kennedy repeated it in his Election four years ago, a tired nation is a Tory nation. But if you want to see Britain moving ahead and getting ahead, if you want to sweep away outmoded ideas, the old boy network that has condemned so many of our ablest young people to frustration. If you want to see that at every level of our national life talent and ability are recognised and given their head, then you'll feel with us the sense of challenge and of excitement and adventure. For it the past belongs to the Tories, the future belongs to us, all of us. Isn't the choice that we're making on Thursday just this? That we want the children for whom all of us are voting to look back and to say that these were the great days, this was the moment when the people of Britain said enough in enough. When they decided to take their future and the future of our country into their own hands. This is what we shall be voting about on Thursday.