7th June 1983

DENNIS HEALEY:

It's only three weeks since this election began. And already another fifteen thousand people have lost their jobs. Another man or woman, boy or girl, is joining the dole queue every two minutes of every day and every night. No-one is safe. And that's why we put jobs above everything else.

MICHAEL FOOT:

That's right. Getting our people back to work. Jobs, jobs, jobs and how to get them. That's the big question in this election. Just look around - engineers on the dole, building workers on the dole, teachers on the dole, skilled craftsmen on the dole, trained technicians on the dole, nurses on the dole, seamen on the dole, and more and more school-leavers on the dole. That's the terrible problem and it's still getting worse. That's the problem we've got to solve. And it affects so many of the other problems we have to tackle, like protecting our health service and our schools and getting decent houses and pensions. How to stop the rising flood of unemployment, which indeed is still rising every week as Dennis said. Of course, there is an alternative. That is the case Labour puts to the nation. We have the policies and the team to apply them. Policies which offer a real positive alternative to Tory waste, and experienced men and women who will know how to make them work. Peter Shore will tell you about our emergency programme, the one we will act upon on our first day in office.

PETER SHORE:

Yes, we will create by the end of our first year five hundred thousand new jobs - in building and construction, in transport and communications, in health, social and other services, in public and private industry. The money we need is available now - but is wasted. Seventeen billion pounds wasted on paying people who want to work not to work. Ten billion pounds of our savings flooding abroad to invest in the economies of our competitors. And North Sea oil draining away at the rate of eight billion pounds a year. We shall stop this waste and use our money to cut the burden of taxation and to increase public investment and expenditure here in [growth?] and we shall start it on day one.

JOHN SMITH:

The moment you bring Labour back we'll start an emergency programme of investment in Britain's investment-starved industry, transport, housing, new technology. Here's just one example of how it works. Invest money in sorely-needed new homes, and brickworks earn money. And all the other construction industries, they all need to take on new workers. The workers stop getting dole money and start buying clothes for their children again. Clothing shops order more from the clothing factories. The clothing factories order more from the textile industry, and all along the line more workers come off the dole and start buying things again. And that's just one example of how by investing in Britain Labour can get Britain working again.

ROY HATTERSLEY:

Our policies on law and order are precise and practical. Peace and safety come from effective policing. Police back amongst the people, on the beat and part of the community - well-known, respected and accepted. So we'll operate a common-sense four point plan. Police on foot, back on the streets. Housing estates made more thief-proof, with better lighting and controlled entry into blocks of flats. Community police committees that give you a say on how your police behave. Better technical and support services for the police themselves. Labour will create the social conditions which reduce crime. And we'll organise the police in a way which deters crime, and when crimes are committed, unlike today, actually catches the criminals.

ANN TAYLOR:

But at the present time, the cost of living and the level of unemployment has put more pressure on families than ever before, and three and a half million people now live in condemned houses. Yet fewer homes were started in 1982 than in any year since 1925, and money has not been spent to modernise and keep existing properties in good condition. Labour will fund a new repairs and improvement programme and reverse this trend. And in the last four years mortgage rates have reached record levels and council rates have more than doubled. We will freeze all rents for a year and increase investment in all sectors of housing. We'll give councils the means to build fifty per cent more houses and so start achieving our aim of a decent home for every family.

NEIL KINNOCK:

Our children and young people are our future. Labour believes that education and training is a vital investment for our country and so we'll provide nursery schooling for all children whose parents want it. We'll ensure smaller classes in primary schools to give all youngsters a flying start. We'll invest in technological, scientific and cultural education to equip secondary school children for the realities of the modern world. We'll establish a two year scheme of education and training - with pay - for all sixteen and seventeen year old learners. We'll restore the sixty-one thousand university and polytechnic places that the Tories have taken away from qualified young people. Now, in modern times, proper education is the raw material of our country's success. We can't afford to let it be neglected or wasted by the Tories.

ANN TAYLOR:

'Cannot afford' seems to have been the Tory answer to everything. The basic rights we should all enjoy have become a privilege under the Tories. We now know the Tories' plan to run down the health service - beds lie empty and hospitals have been closed while doctors and nurses are jobless and health charges go up. Labour would provide a health service true to its original aims: free at the point of use. A health-care building programme will be started: out go prescription charges, out go dental charges. Priority will be according to medical need, not to wealth. For pensioners, TV licenses will be free; their Christmas bonus will be doubled; and their awful heating bills would be reduced, by new special fuel allowances.

DENNIS HEALEY:

We can't make sure our people get the health and care they need unless we create jobs, real jobs. Getting people back to work again, getting people earning and spending again, that's what matters most. The key to that is investment. Investment in homes, in transport, and above all in industry - we must get those new technologies into Britain's plants - and investment in our people, caring for the young and the old, the sick, and the poor.

MICHAEL FOOT:

These are the things we've been talking about from one end of the country to the other during this election campaign. Our constructive plan for getting jobs, jobs to help the individuals denied the right to work, jobs to help the country as a whole to rebuild our industry and our social services. Our big aim from the start has been to end the sense of hopelessness and helplessness in the face of mass unemployment which Tory words and deeds have spread. I think we've made real progress here, showing people what can truly be done. More and more people can see the sense of spending more to sustain and protect our health service, to improve standards of education for all our children, to give a better deal to the pensioners who have helped to create the nation's wealth, to get jobs - real jobs and real training - for the great army of our young people now without a chance in life. Like everyone else they've only got one life to live and we must come to their rescue with all the speed we can muster. Compassion and common-sense, and imagination and fair-play for all our people. These are the good qualities of our country, which our Labour team has applied to our modern problems. Our team has translated those qualities into practical ideas for action, and that means a plan properly costed and one the nation can afford. Of course, we don't imagine it can be done by edicts from on high, by laws imposed from above. It can only be done by a party which calls for co-operation from the whole community, local authorities, industries great and small, public and private, the trade unions, to get those jobs for all our people we will need the backing of the whole nation and the Labour party is the only one in this election which makes that appeal. So come and help us, help us to get those jobs and to save our country. Think positive, act positive, vote Labour.
