28th September 1964

HAROLD WILSON:

The choice we are making in this election will affect every, family and every member of every family. Let's get right down to the problems that practically all of us face today. First there's the problem of making ends meet. Our Conservative opponents have spent a great deal of money on advertising, on telling you about the prosperity they say they have given you. They haven't, you've done it, often in spite of them. And in very many cases it's only been possible through long hours of overtime and because of wives going out to work.

Of course our standard of living is higher than it was five or ten or twenty years ago. So it ought to be, that's natural. It's true of every industrial country. But it has risen a great deal less in Britain than most others. A fact the Conservatives simply can't deny and to be fair to them, they haven't tried to. But what does our standard of living depend on? It depends on how much is coming into the home, which is mainly a question of wages and salaries. And it depends too on how much goes out. The government which now tries to take credit for your prosperity has spent most of its time fighting to keep wages down. Remember the wage freeze, the pay pause? You remember Selwyn Lloyd telling us that we shall be bankrupt if he didn't put up prescription charges for old age pensioners and that they just couldn't afford to pay nurses a decent wage. Yet the same Chancellor could find money for the surtax payers. Remember how the teachers, the civil servants, social workers and only a few weeks ago the postmen have had to struggle to get reasonable wages? Remember how Conservative ministers have said flatly that if anyone pressed for higher wages the government would dry up the supply of money so that unemployment would result? And in fact the direct result of Selwyn Lloyd's cuts was a sharp rise in unemployment and it's taken three years and an election to get the unemployment figures back to where they were then. Now they're claiming the credit for the higher incomes that you have earned.

But there's another side to the problem. It's not just a question of incomes, it's what a family has to spend out of their income and the first charge of every household is the rent or the mortgage payment for those who are buying their own house; and with that goes rates and if you own your own house, the heavy cost of house maintenance and repairs. High rents have been deliberate government policy. We have the Rent Act, rising rents swelling the incomes of property companies and driving thousands of tenants from their homes. This is still going on and it will get worse unless something is done. We shall repeal the Rent Act, restore security of tenure and see that rents are fixed at a fair level. We shall help people seeking to buy a home and reduce the mortgage payments they have to make. The government as a matter of policy have raised interest rates; this is why council house rents and building society mortgage payments and rates have gone up. Then we have the problem of continually rising prices - meat, milk, bread - very soon groceries; rising fares, children's clothes and shoes, and shoe repairs as well.

These things I have just been talking about are facts within the acknowledged and day-to-day experience of every one of us.  Why is it then that after thirteen years of unusually favourable world economic conditions for Britain, the Tory government have simply failed to cope with these growing problems? At any rate the facts of the Conservative record are not in dispute and now I'm going to ask Christopher Mayhew to illustrate just for a minute or two some of the things that have been happening.

CHRISTOPHER MAYHEW:

In the past we've often used charts and diagrams to set out the facts of the Conservative record. We've made them very accurate and they've never been challenged. And now we're glad to see non Labour newspapers doing the same and reinforcing many of the points we've been making ourselves. The Guardian has just published a chart comparing the rise in living standards of different countries over the last ten years. That's Britain there, a rise of twenty five percent a quarter. Look how much less that is than other quite representative countries like the Netherlands, Sweden - a wealthy country, France, Italy, Germany and Japan. Looking at this chart it seems absurd that the Conservatives should be making the rise in our standard of living as one of their main election issues at the present time.

The Guardian, of course, only shows a few countries but, unfortunately, if we compare ourselves with other larger groups of countries, the results are equally disappointing. You may have seen our programme last month in which we showed that if we'd simply kept up with the rate of advance of the fourteen other countries of Western Europe under Conservative rule we would now be producing extra goods and services worth eight thousand million pounds per year; that's the equivalent of four pounds ten shillings a week for every employed person in the country. We costed the Conservatives stop go programme and it cost us all four pounds ten shillings a week. The Guardian has also just published a chart on housing. This shows that in the United Kingdom, that's the United Kingdom there, we are now spending about three percent of our total production on housing - about the same as Japan but much lees than the United States, France, Sweden, Germany, Italy, Switzerland. If we'd devoted as large a proportion of our resources to housing as they have, we'd be right on top of our housing problem today.

And then there's education. Well I'd like to present you with the latest facts in the famous Hogg report, but Mr Hogg, of course, has declined to let us see the facts of his report until after polling day. Meantime we have to make do with other official reports. I have the Newsome Report here on secondary schools. It shows about school buildings as a whole, one-fifth only are up to standard, two-fifths have some serious deficiencies and the remaining two-fifths have many serious deficiencies. And the facts about the balance of payments. The Board of Trade is more forthcoming than the Ministry of Education; and this chart, the latest official chart of the Board of Trade, shows the gap in our trade. Those large columns show the gap between our exports and imports. The amount by which we are failing to pay our way in the world. Look how the gap grew in 1960. It was after that we had the pay pause and the unemployment and look how it's growing again today. We're getting into debt today at a rate of between one and two million pounds a day and if the chart doesn't speak for itself, today's Daily Mail I have here. It says "Our trading deficit is described even officially as massive and is larger than at any time since the war. Exports have been disappointing and imports too high" and so on. Now these are just a few facts. We shall show many more in these broadcasts - just a few facts to set against the Conservatives election propaganda.

HAROLD WILSON:

How can we get these things right? How can we get Britain ahead again? It's nice to feel when we lose some international contest that we're perhaps sporting losers. But isn't it about time we started winning? Anyway, good luck to our team in Tokyo. But in the international economic league, aren't we getting a bit sick of being told it can't be done? How is it going to be paid for the Conservatives ask? For a start we might well ask them that question. For after twelve years in office they suddenly last winter rushed out a whole series of promises on all those issues which for years have been the nation couldn't afford. You know I think the Conservatives have done a very valuable service in this election in admitting frankly that their programmes cannot be fulfilled unless we get a steady four percent increase in production.

That's all very well. But what they don't tell you is that this four percent is nearly double the rate they actually achieved during the last thirteen years. Judged on their record the Tories' modernisation plan is a phoney. It can't be achieved without the steady expansion which just has not happened under three successive Tory governments. Why, even the election boom is petering out after only a few months and the prosperity they're talking about they're getting on the slate - borrowing abroad. If they were allowed to go on like this the country would soon be in pawn, with all that means. All the experts agree on this as you saw in Christopher Mayhew's talk a minute ago.

So I must warn you whoever wins this election is going to be faced with very grave economic difficulties right away. Of course a government determined to master the crisis could cope with it. But I must tell you in order to pay for the houses, the schools, the pensions, to improve living standards we've got to have a steadily expanding economy and the Tory's stop go stop is not the way to do it. There's much more to do than raising the money. It's a question a physical resources and how we use them. Take housing. Like everything else it means planning, it means drive and that's what we haven't had. They've just blithely announced an increased housing programme after thirteen years and they forgot to plan the bricks. To get rid of the slum schools, schools without even the minimum needed for good teaching. The schools described in the report Mr Quintin Hogg wants to keep from you until after the election. This means physical action - bulldozers to clear them away - bricks and mortar or timber and concrete and glass - to build the new schools. That's why I keep emphasising the production that they've failed to achieve.

So here we have it. Planning, work, priorities. There's nothing mysterious about it. The problem is how do we as a national family allocate our housekeeping budget in such a way as to see that individual families are getting the best out of life. I was talking about housing just now. We can only solve this problem if we set aside more of our resources to this job than we've been doing. If we make it a number one priority instead of letting it trail behind less essential but of course much more profitable projects such as building luxury office blocks as a nice money making speculation. And then, social security. It's not the government, any government, Labour or Tory which provides pensions. The British people as a family has to make provision for those who are in need. To look after the older members, giving them the chance as a right, not as a charity, not as a donation, to live in their retirement in dignity and comfort - the widows, the sick, the disabled. If a family's income rises, it doesn't spend it all, it makes provision for the future by taking out insurance policies, it provides more generously for the father or mother living in retirement and this is what we're going to do as a nation. We've said clearly how we're going to do it and in our future election broadcasts my colleagues will be coming along to show exactly what we propose to do and how we're going to do it. It's just a matter of common sense and of common humanity, deciding which things are important, which things must be done first, but it does mean having a government, a government which isn't afraid to take decisions, a government which won't sit back and let the money-makers, the take-over bidders, the tycoons, shape our future. A government which is concerned with the national interest, the interest of mothers and fathers and individual families. A government of the people, yes but we believe bringing in all the people, not just a privileged few. It's a tremendously [the rest of the transcript is missing]