2nd June 1983

MICHAEL FOOT:

How are we going to save and protect our National Health Service? It is one of our country's most precious possessions. It comes to help people - sick people, old people, children who fall ill - at the very moment they need that help most: when they are afraid; when they certainly don't want the extra worry of how the bills are to be paid. That's why the Labour Party created the National Health Service - a free service across the whole country, free of any cash payment for the patient. Nothing like that ever existed before. That was the ideal of those who founded the service, a wonderful ideal indeed - a practical proof of how the people's needs can be placed first before anything else. But what Labour created has been under attack for four years - a most serious attack as we shall show. One of the big issues at stake in this election is to make sure that our National Health Service is truly kept a national service for all our people. Only the Labour party that created this service can do that.

FEMALE ACTOR (RP accent):

We have no intention of raising prescription charges.

JOAN LESTOR:

The Tories have raised prescription charges by seven times: twenty p per item to one pound forty. Hospitals have been closed and vital projects axed, while private medicine has been actively encouraged. Routine dental charges have gone up from five pounds to thirteen pound fifty - two and a half times. Charges for glasses have more than doubled - from six pounds fifteen p to fifteen pound fifty. Seven hundred and ninety-one beds are lying empty, and at the same time there are over one thousand doctors plus over eight thousand nurses out of a job. Charges up, standards down. A cry that can be repeated when we look at the Tory performance on education. Education spending has been cut by seven hundred and fifty-six million pounds in real terms. Five hundred and eighty-two state schools have been scheduled for closure. A quarter of all primary and a third of all secondary schools haven't enough books. A staggering twenty-nine thousand five hundred and seventy trained teachers are out of work. No wonder the school inspectors could report 'It is unlikely that existing standards, particularly in numeracy and literacy, will be maintained'. So our young people, the future of Britain, can't get a decent education under the Tories. When they leave school one in two will be out of work. What a terrible prospect.
Older people are no better served either. Now there's no link between pensions and earnings - another Tory move - all pensioners have lost out, and married couples' income is down by two pound twenty-five p a week, and a single pensioner by one pound forty-five.

And now you are being asked to vote for more of the same. 'We're on the right track' they say. Ask the three million unemployed if they think that this is true. Ask the people trying to run the National Health Service on a shoe string if it's true. And ask the jobless teachers and building workers if they believe we're on the right track.

Health-care is our right. Labour will increase expenditure by, for instance, building much needed health centres. Prescription charges will be phased out; so will dental charges. There'll be no more queue-jumping as we concentrate our efforts and money by investing in the National Health Service. We shall ensure that all National Health Service staff will be properly rewarded in terms of pay and hours.

Another example of falling standards is in education: the development of the next generation. Labour will make local authorities provide nursery education. Labour will make it possible for classes to be reduced. Essentials like books will be provided so children at primary schools get the best possible start. All children, of whatever background, will get an equal chance in going on to secondary school, and Labour will re-establish the school meals and milk services drastically reduced by the Tories. And we'll help parents by increasing child benefit by two pound. Reduction has been the Tory motto.

As with the young, so for the old. All important services like home helps and residential care are being axed. Our pensioners suffer terribly, as costs for essentials like heat and lighting go up and real income comes down. Labour will re-establish the pensions earning link and restore the two pound twenty-five p and one pound forty-five p lost there. In November 1983 Labour will increase pensions to fifty-eight pound for a married couple and thirty-six pound thirty for someone single. We shall make TV licenses available free to pensioners. We shall reduce heating bills for pensioners through fuel allowances. In short, pensioners must share fully in the country's future prosperity.

MALE:

My colleagues and I are very worried about our caring society in general and the National Health Service in particular. As each cut comes along we get more and more desperate. In my hospital we've had little replacement equipment for two years, and no money for a scanner which we need to improve our diagnosis of brain disease. But it's not only equipment we need. We need more nurses, more doctors and more hospitals. These we had under all previous Labour governments, and only a Labour government will do it again. The Tory proposals for increasing private medicine won't help the majority. It won't help the elderly, the chronic sick and the mentally handicapped. Indeed, anyone who really requires care. Only a Labour government will increase resources and allow us to return to a properly funded National Health Service. This must be part of a caring and compassionate society. We must put patients before profits.

DENNIS HEALEY:

The Conservatives are prejudiced against the welfare state. They are prejudiced in favour of private profit. But if they won they'd have to cut the health service like they'd have to cut pensions and housing and education in any case. Because they're expecting to spend thoudands of millions of pounds more as rising unemployment as their dole queues lengthen. It would be a false economy. Take the health service. Even now, Britain loses twelve times more working days through sickness than through strikes. So every penny spent on health means more people are producing wealth. And the figures show that a public health service is very much cheaper than private medicine. Look at America. Their private medicine is twice as expensive as our National Health Service, and they come far below us in the international league tables for health. In fact, a good public health service is good economic sense. So are good education and good housing. The Tories say we can't afford to care for people: Labour says we can't afford not to care - because caring is not only morally right, it's economically right as well. So are you going to say 'No' to health, 'No' to education, 'No' to the young and to the old? Or are you going to think positive, act positive and say 'Yes' to Labour?

MAN:

I believe in people not in profits - always have done. I believe that the Labour party will do more for people, it's a people's party.

WOMAN:

It just frightens me that if the Tories get into power again that these these sort of doctors and nurses that are the best in the country are going to be tempted towards private medicine.

MAN:

I'm going to vote Labour.

OTHER MAN:

Why?

MAN:

Well because er I'm a pensioner and they've er promised to do a lot for us such as er television licenses and er extra bonus for Christmas and er increase the pension.

YOUNGER MAN:

I mean I work in a college erm but the cuts have definitely made an impact particularly for adults. The opportunities have decreased a lot.

YOUNGER WOMAN:

I care about children not being able to get medical treatment much more because I think I can see my own child in that position.

DENNIS HEALEY:

Think positive, act positive, vote Labour.