12th February 1974

VOICE:
Do you think it's a fair government like Heath says? Heath's fighting this election that their government is being fair and firm. Do you think it's ...

MAN:
No, definitely. You know how he got in, don't you, kidded the women last time.

WOMAN 1:
He did, because prices are going up.

MAN:
Kidded all the women that's ...

WOMAN 1:
Prices would be all kept down. Cost of living would be kept down. What did he do when he got in? Cost of living went up, rents went up, mortgages went up.

MAN 2:
Oh it's a joke, it really is a joke what that man's promised us and what he's done since.

WOMAN 2:
A small tin of spam ten pence in the Wilson government, twenty-two and they'd crossed it over to twenty.

WOMAN 3:
It's such a worry and when you've got a family to feed.

WOMAN 1:
When you want a raise in your wage you can't have one, it's phase one and phase two and phase three, but that's not stopping prices going up, is it?

WOMAN 3:
They'll be carrying me out in a box I think, if this goes on for another five years, because it's a problem.

JAMES CALLAGHAN:
Well, despite that lady's troubles at least she's got wry sense of humour. I've got a feeling we're all going to need that during 1974. There's no doubt what this election is about: it's about Mr Heath's clear failure, in the face of his promises in the matter of prices and rents. It's about the breakdown he's created in industrial relations and it's about how we can make a fresh start. But although we know what it's about I have been puzzled about why he's called it now. At first I thought it was because Mr Heath didn't intend to pay the miners a penny piece more, come hell or high water, but not a bit of it. Since the election was declared he's started to retreat on that issue. Last night he gave another reason: ah, he said, my quarrel is with a small group of extremists in industry, we've had enough of you. Fair enough. But how does an election help to get rid of them - if he has the same policies after it's all over? The Tories do not know how to handle industrial relations. Look at their record on strikes. For every day's work lost through strikes with a Labour Government the Tories have lost three days - three times as many. And look at some of the unprecedented groups of workers who've been on strike for the first time in the whole of their professional existence: hospital workers, fire brigades, ambulance-men, professional engineers - even civil servants. A few years ago it would have been unthinkable. Now is it because they've all suddenly become extremists or is there a more down to earth reason? Is Mr Heath so remote that he doesn't understand that these groups of men and women have been struggling to keep their heads above the flood waters of rising prices, high rents and record mortgage interest rates? And some of them because they have a deeply felt comparative grievance about what their just reward should be.

Before Mr Heath deludes himself into believing that many of the groups of workers who've settled their pay claims without strike accept that his pay policy is fair, you ought to talk to some of them, talk with some of the young teachers who are now leaving London, because they can't afford the rents - let alone contemplate buying a house. And as to the groups who've been on strike for the first time in their lives - these people I've been talking about - well, whatever Mr Heath may say, you will make up your own mind whether you think these kind of people are extremists or not. Mr Heath's actions and policies leave nearly wrecked our industrial relations system. He's. undermined faith in arbitration as a means of settling disputes. That's why some groups have gone on strike for the first time: people who always preferred arbitration, in preference to striking. I've yet to meet the trade unionist or the manager in industry who has any confidence in Mr Heath's handling of industrial affairs. And if by any mischance he were re-elected and went on like he has been there'll be more extremists in this country in five year's time than there are now. It isn't sufficient for him to say we've had enough of you, we've got to find a way out. if we're to end industrial disruption then it will need a Labour government to do it because of our intimate links and understanding with industry, and the trade unions.

The first step we'll take will be to rebuild some confidence in the integrity of our industrial relations system. Unions and management will be urged and encouraged to take their cases to independent arbitration, instead of trying to settle through the medium of strikes. Good, you may say, that's good, but will it work? Will the trade unions agree? The answer is yes.

It's now a year since a group of us were deputed by the Labour Party to have a long series of meetings with the T.U.C. leaders and they and we agreed on this - to make a new conciliation and arbitration service a central part of Britain's industrial relations system. It will be independent; it will be non-governmental. Its offices will be established throughout the land, not only to deal with national disputes but also to be in a position to resolve local disputes. Separate from it will be a new high-powered commission to begin an examination of the relative values of different kinds of work and the proper rewards that should be paid. These first steps will help us to reduce disruption, because ordinary groups of workers will not have the same feelings of frustration to resort to strikes. Far more useful approach than Mr Heath's philosophy of bash 'em all.

Of course this isn't enough. Ending industrial unrest is important in itself, and important for industry, but that alone isn't going to be sufficient to deal with inflation. This country's in real trouble with rising prices. Some of the reasons are outside the government's control but others - increase in rents for example, due to take place again in April - due entirely to the government's own decisions and could be reversed by them.

Yesterday we had the announcement of a crushing blow of another eight pence a gallon on petrol. Some increase there must be, but the oil companies are making huge profits. Unless our tax laws are changed they will be able to arrange their affairs in such a way that they will pay virtually no tax in this country. According to the parliamentary public accounts committee the nation stands to lose fifteen hundred million pounds on North Sea oil if this happens - enough to pay for one year's increase in the old age pension. I challenge Mr Heath now to state how he proposes to ensure that we do not suffer this tax loss.

No wonder people have a feeling that 1974 is going to be a bad year - it is. Perhaps that's why we're having the election now and not later. So, what action can a Labour Government take after February the twenty-eighth? First we will stop the government order to increase rents again in April: this is within the government's control and we shall do it. Secondly, we shall try to cushion the effect of high prices on the housewife by subsidising some of the key foods. Third - we shall help the worst off by increasing the old age pension to ten pounds and sixteen pounds per week and we shall also help the long-term sick and disabled, although it may mean taxing the better off to do it. There'll be greater fairness with a Labour government. We shall work to get rid of the two standard society in matters such as hospital treatment and education. We shall work with industry, through a new national enterprise board, to agree with large companies and firms their programmes for modernisation for up-to-date plant and machinery, and for their expansion. Now none of this will have an at-a-stroke effect: we're not as rash as that, or as he was. We have got a difficult period to go through first, everyone knows it, but gradually, by combining all these measures I've outlined, and others, we shall begin to have an effect on the cost of living and therefore on inflation and also on the sense of fairness in our society. We shall get Britain on the road again. There is a way out. Let us get together - let's get to work with Labour.
