he Eager BeaverIn the United States, the beaver is one of the largest members of the rodent family. This animal can manipulate the environment to suit its own needs and can even construct its own home. Beavers are vulnerable to predators when they are on dry land, so they need deep water for safety. If nearby water is not deep enough, a beaver will build a dam to make the water deeper. A beaver dam can be very large and can contain thousands of pieces of wood cut by the beaver. Beavers even cut down small trees to eat the bark, leaves and twigs. Because beavers are members of the rodent family, they have four incisor teeth in the front of their mouths that never stop growing, so beavers must continuously chew on wood to keep their teeth from growing too long. Beavers have other unusual characteristics that make them fascinating. Some of these flat-tailed creatures build homes called lodges while some live in holes in the riverbanks. Years ago, beavers were prized for their fur and so many were trapped that they almost became extinct. Hunters found the beavers by looking for their dams and lodges, so some beavers stopped building and began living in riverbank holes. Even though beavers are now protected, some beavers still live in these holes, but most build lodges.  Even beavers that build lodges keep a few riverbank holes and escape tunnels to use in case of an emergency. Another interesting feature of beavers is that they will store a bunch of branches under the water near their lodge to use as food during the winter. When their lake or stream is covered with ice, the beaver has a handy supply of food sealed under the ice.  A colony of beavers, which usually consists of five or more, can stay warm in their lodge with their food supply nearby. They can survive in their lodge for at least four months during the coldest days of winter. When spring comes and the ice thaws, beavers will feast on water lily tubers, clover and the new green shoots and bark of saplings, or small trees. Though the beavers eat tree branches and bark, this pruning actually helps some of the trees grow new branches, making them bushier the next year. 