How the Chipmunk Got Its StripesLong ago, the Earth was covered in darkness. None of the creatures living thereknew what daylight looked like.One day, all of the animals of the forest gathered together in a clearing. Theywondered if it would be better to remain in darkness, or if it would be better toalso have light. Deer, Chipmunk, Raccoon, Wolf, Bear, and many other creaturesclimbed to the top of the highest mountain. The mountain stood so tall that therewere no trees on its top, and it was covered only with rocks. Millions of starsblinked in the dark sky overhead. The biggest and most powerful animal in theforest was the bear, and he was the first to reach the mountaintop. Bear stood onthe highest peak, looked out over the forest below, and argued for remaining indarkness. He said that the creatures of the forest would be able to sleep better indarkness because there would be no light to keep them awake. Most of the otheranimals were afraid, and they agreed with Bear. Raccoon said that he did not mindthe darkness because he was so smart that he could find plenty of food, even in thedark. Wolf was easy to please, too. She didn't mind the darkness because she couldhowl in darkness or in light.But one animal did stand up to Bear. Chipmunk, the smallest of the animals, arguedthat it would be better to have both light and dark. Chipmunk was very clever. AsBear continued to argue for darkness, she made many good arguments for light.Slowly, the night passed. Bear grew tired of talking, but Chipmunk chattered onand on, as if she had all of the energy in the world. As the other animals droppedoff to sleep, one by one, Chipmunk kept arguing. Finally, the first sunrise everseen by the animals appeared over the top of the mountain. They woke up and wereamazed by what they saw.Chipmunk began to dance from rock to rock. Bear became angry because he didn'tget his way. He roared loudly and ran after Chipmunk. He chased Chipmunk all theway down the mountain. Bear was fast, and he reached out his giant paw to grabChipmunk. Chipmunk got away, but not before Bear managed to scratch her backwith his long claws. And that is why, to this day, you can see stripes onChipmunk's back! 