Paper Dragon Fairy TaleOnce upon a time, on a wall in a little house in a country far away, there hung a beautifulpaper dragon. It was carefully folded and looked almost lifelike. The dragon was painted thecolors of the rainbow, and its tail was spread wide like the tail of a peacock.Many years went by, and the people who lived in the house enjoyed the picture of thecolorful dragon. People who came to visit the house stopped to see the brightly-colored dragon,but no one ever asked about where it had come from. A couple of times, someone took it downfrom the wall, only to put it on another wall in the little house, and arrange the tail slightlydifferently. Doing this, they felt a vibrant feeling of energy and of life. Something about holdingthe paper dragon made them feel free.Once, a stranger on his journey passed by the house and happened to see the beautifuldragon hanging on the wall. Struck by its beauty, he stared closely at the dragon. Without askingpermission, he lifted down the dragon from the wall. He hung it over his arm and went out intothe yard. With skilled fingers he tied a string around the dragon's body and quickly went to anopen place. As a breeze began, the stranger carefully let out the string and ran into the wind. Upthe dragon lifted into the air and it soared high above like a kite. The dragon seemed to bepulling higher and higher into the air, almost as though it was flying.The people who lived in the house came outside to watch the man with the dragon. Theywere surprised to see their beautiful paper dragon flying above them, brightly colored with itslong tail flowing behind it. They began to think that, maybe, there was something about thisdragon that they had not noticed before.As the wind blew, the dragon happily danced in the air above. Without warning, thestring broke, and the dragon flew higher and higher, further and further away from them. Thepeople below squinted as they looked up at the brightly colored dragon. Suddenly the little paperdragon began growing; its paper wings stretched wide and long. Its paper body began to changeand the small creature flew higher and higher. The people below looked in amazement as thedragon came to life and flew away. Turning to them, the stranger said, “Some things are justmeant to be free.” 