The Horses of ChincoteagueWhen I was a child, one of my favorite authors was Marguerite Henry. She wrote about wildponies that live on the Island of Chincoteague. Chincoteague is an island off the coast ofVirginia and Maryland. For hundreds of years, wild ponies have lived on Chincoteague’sneighboring island, Assateague. The ponies, like the ones in Henry’s book, get to Chincoteagueeach year by swimming across the channel between the two islands. Locals round up some of thewild ponies from Assateague and swim the ponies across the channel between the two islands.Once the ponies get to Chincoteague, they are auctioned. The ponies adapt well to domestic life,and the culling, or removal, of some of the horses helps keep the wild pony herds healthy.Because I read so many of Henry’s books about these two islands, I developed a mental pictureof how they would look. All of the beautiful descriptions found in these books helped me createpictures in my mind, and I could just imagine the ponies prancing along the beach and swimmingacross the channel. I desperately wanted to go there to see the wild ponies.After much pleading, my parents agreed to take my family on a vacation to visit these islands.We drove through the middle of the night so we could spend the whole next day touring theislands. We arrived before the sun rose. Because it was so dark, no one in my family realized wehad parked next to a paddock that held a herd of horses. Just as the sun started to come up overthe horizon, we heard the whinnying of ponies and the pounding of hooves. We awoke to poniesgalloping across the field. It was just like I had imagined. There was so much I wanted to learnabout the islands while I was there, but I really wanted to learn about the ponies. I had an idea ofwhat they were like from the books I had read, but it was exciting to see them with my own eyesand learn everything I could about them.While my family vacationed in Chincoteague, I learned many things about the wild ponies. TheChincoteague ponies come in all shapes, sizes and colors. Because of their diet, these ponieshave very round bellies. When the ponies are in the wild, on Assateague, they live a difficultlife. They forage for food in the salty marshlands eating marsh grasses, seaweed and even poisonivy. Because their diet is so high in salt, they must drink twice as much water as typical ponies.Though they live on an island, they cannot drink the salty ocean water; therefore, they must findfresh water inland to drink. Although these wild ponies have difficult lives, they have survivedmany hundreds of years in the wild.The ponies are a significant part of the history of the islands of Chincoteague and Assateague. Iwas so glad I was able to see them in person. The books of Marguerite Henry introduced me to aplace I had never before been able to visit. Through these stories, I learned about the beautifulponies living in the wild and the process they go through when they are domesticated. Withoutreading Henry’s books, I may have never known of the wonders of these islands, and I maynever have been so determined to visit. You too can begin learning about these beautiful, wildhorses by reading one of Marguerite Henry’s most famous books, Misty of Chincoteague. 