Rosa ParksRosa Parks was born February 4, 1913 in Tuskegee, Alabama. She spent her childhood inAlabama. When she was 11, she enrolled in the Montgomery Industrial School for Girls. Later, sheworked as a seamstress in Montgomery.Rosa Parks has been called the "mother of the civil rights movement" and one of the mostimportant citizens of the 20th century. In the early 1950s, the bus system in Montgomery, as in manyparts of the United States, was segregated. Blacks were required to board the bus at the front, buy theirtickets, and then re-board the bus in the back. Sometimes, they weren’t able to get on the bus againbefore it drove away. They were not allowed to sit in the front of the bus, which sometimes made itdifficult to get off at the right stop. Even if they were sitting in the “black section”, they were stillrequired to give their seats up to white passengers if the “white section” was full. In December of1955, Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat on a city bus to a white passenger. The bus driver had herarrested. She was tried and convicted of violating a local ordinance.Her act sparked a citywide boycott of the bus system. This refusal to ride the bus introduced thecountry to a clergyman named Martin Luther King, Jr. who gained national prominence, leading theprotest with the words: “There comes a time that people get tired”. Eventually, the U.S. Supreme Courtmade a decision outlawing segregation on city buses. In December 1956, Montgomery’s publictransportation system was legally integrated.Over the next four decades, Rosa Parks helped make her fellow Americans aware of the historyof the civil rights struggle. This pioneer in the struggle for racial equality earned many honors,including the Martin Luther King Jr. Nonviolent Peace Prize, the Presidential Medal of Freedom, andthe Congressional Gold Medal. She is an example of courage and determination and an inspirationalsymbol to all Americans. She recently died in Detroit, Michigan on October 24, 2005 at age 92. 