Piano LessonsSusie loved to hear her older sister, Emma, play piano. Listening to the pretty notes andwatching Emma’s fingers press the keys made Susie want to play music too. But every timeSusie asked to play, her mother would tell her how much work it was to learn to play piano well.Emma made it look easy. Susie was sure she could learn to play even though she was a fewyears younger, so she decided she had to prove to her mother that she was ready for theresponsibility. Susie helped her mom around the house by washing the dishes and dusting.“Mom, can I start taking piano lessons?” Susie asked. “Susie, as long as you understand that you are going to have to practice every day, youcan take piano lessons,” her mom said.Susie was so excited. She could not wait to play “Twinkle, Twinkle Little Star,” one ofher favorite songs. In no time, she thought, she would play as well as Emma! Susie was excited and nervous for her first piano lesson. When she finally got there, shewas surprised; her teacher had flashcards and a book for her. Emma just had music notes in herpiano books. Susie did not know there were so many other things to know about the piano first.She had to learn each of the notes, or the sounds, that the piano makes. Then, she had to learnwhich key on the piano made each note. There were even Italian words she had to learn! Herteacher showed her everything she had to practice and learn before the next lesson. During thatfirst lesson, Susie never even got to touch a key on the piano.“Don’t people get to play piano at piano lessons?” she wondered.The next day, when Susie got home from school, her mom had her snack all ready. Sheate it fast and started to run outside.“Where are you going?” her mom asked.“Outside to play kickball,” Susie said. “Bye mom!”“Not so fast, you must study your piano flashcards,” her mom said. “Then, you can play.” “But mom, everyone is playing kickball,” Susie whined.“Susie, this is what you wanted, now you have to follow through with it,” her mom said. 