Who is Dr. Seuss? While many children and adults have enjoyed books by Dr. Seuss, very few actually knowanything about Dr. Seuss himself. Dr. Seuss was born in 1904 and was given the name TheodorSeuss Geisel. He grew up in Springfield, Massachusetts and left town as a young man to attendDartmouth College in New Hampshire. In college, he wrote for the school newspaper. Geiselcreated the name Dr. Seuss, a penname he would continue to write under for the rest of his life.Seuss first entered college with the idea that he would become a professor, but a classmate whosaw him sketching thought he should become an artist. He soon pursued his passion for drawing.After college, he got a job working as a cartoonist for a newspaper. However, once the UnitedStates became involved in World War II, Seuss wanted to use his talent to help in the war effort.He worked for the Army making different types of war movies and animated films that wereused to train soldiers. Publishers who saw his work during the war wanted Seuss to illustrate achildren’s book. The war experience, along with his experience as a journalist, led to his desireto write and illustrate his own children books. Dr. Seuss had a slow and difficult start as an author. His first book almost did not getpublished. However, after many months of being turned down his persistence paid off. Seusssoon signed with a new publisher. This small success was enough to keep Dr. Seuss writing andillustrating. While writing, he often put on silly hats to help to reduce the stress of finishing astory. Shortly after his first work was published, Dr. Seuss wrote and published The Cat in theHat, the book that made him famous. For years afterwards, Dr. Seuss continued to write andillustrate many books in his own unique style, which was very different than other authors. Hewon many awards for his books throughout his writing career, and many were adapted fortelevision and movies. The name, Dr. Seuss, became very popular in children’s literature.Though Theodor Seuss Geisel, also known as Dr. Seuss, passed away at the age of 87 in 1991,his books and illustrations continue to live on. 