Shark Facts There are almost 400 different kinds of sharks. Each kind of shark looks different, has a unique diet,and behaves differently. There are sharks in all four oceans of the world. Some sharks are longer than aschool bus, while others are so small they can live in fish tanks. Sharks come in all kinds of colors. Mostof the time, their skin color helps them blend in with their surroundings. But, some sharks that live in thedeepest part of the ocean actually have parts that glow in the dark. Most sharks live in salt water, butsome can live in fresh water. All sharks are unique, or have different qualities that make them so special. Sharks are actually a type of fish. There are some similarities as well as differences between sharksand typical fish. Shark skeletons are made of cartilage. Fish skeletons are made of bones. Cartilage isthe bendy, tough substance in people’s ears and noses. Like other fish, sharks have gills. Gills are howfish breathe. Unlike fish, people use lungs to get oxygen from the air. Fish get oxygen from the waterusing gills. Water needs to move over the gills so that sharks and fish get enough oxygen. To keep thewater moving, most sharks need to swim in water that has a very strong current. Sharks have lots of teeth that are arranged in many rows, rather than in just one row like people. Theteeth from the outside row gradually fall out, and teeth from the next row take their place. Some sharkswill lose 30,000 teeth in a lifetime! Each species of shark has different kinds of teeth. This is becausedifferent sharks eat different kinds of food. Some sharks eat food as small as plankton while other sharkseat animals as big as sea turtles. Most sharks do not eat very often. Some sharks will go weeks betweenmeals. Sharks are at the top of the ocean food chain, which means that no animal is hunting them forfood. This position is very important because sharks keep the other animal populations from growing outof control. This process helps ensure there is diversity, or many types, of life in the oceans. One of the things particularly special about sharks is they have been around a long time. Sharks havelived in the oceans since dinosaurs roamed the Earth about 64 million years ago! Scientists believe theremay have even been shark relatives living 400 million years ago. Sometimes, sharks are described asprimitive because they have existed for so many years, and they have not changed much since then. It isamazing how long sharks have been living in the ocean! Sharks are very different animals, and there aremany things people can learn about them. 