SnowballHello, my name is Snowball, and I am a five-year-old, male, white, longhair Persian cat.  I understand that Cats are not supposed to think about what they want to say.  They are not supposed to think at all; at least that is what humans say.  Well, that is not true.  If I could talk, I would tell you about the many things I have seen and all the numerous things I know.  In other words, there is a lot I want to write. You probably think I am crazy, but what is crazy about getting things off your chest? First, I am a peculiar cat. I think a lot about everything, and I analyze everything. I was merely five months old when a teenage girl found me in west Los Angeles. I was starving and had been left for dead on the street. Susan found me and took me home, saving my life. I was so tired and famished that I immediately dozed off after eating a huge can of cat food. When I awoke, there was still plenty of food for me. It was a regular all-you-can-eat cat smorgasbord. There was dry food and wet food, and the choice was mine. I could eat until I was satiated. I was so thrilled that I had found a new home, one equipped with plenty of food. I was king of the castle and I still am today.Joy is Susan’s mother and Marty is her father. At first, Marty was doubtful about my becoming a member of the family, but Joy convinced him to let me stay. They had some new rules that I had to follow. I had to learn to use the litter box in the bathroom, and I was not allowed outside of the house unless Joy or Marty accompanied me. For my own safety, I could not stay long outside, and I had only five minutes to roll in the grass and sniff the trees in front of our residence. There are canines in our neighborhood, stupid, drooling creatures with bad breath that find it funny to chase us finer felines.Despite my lack of time outdoors, life was just fine, until Coco came along. Coco is the other cat that lives with me now, a female Calico that came to the back door one November day after a heavy rain. She was only four months old and she was hungry. Joy let her in, fed her and kept her.  Cats tend to be extremely territorial and do not like interlopers coming into their territory. Coco had to learn who the boss was, ME!  We fought constantly until we made a truce, but even though we get along now, I never let her forget who rules the roost!