The Seven Ancient Wonders of the WorldThe ancient Greeks made a list of places they thought people should see. This list wasnamed the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World. The Greeks chose seven wonders, because intheir culture this number symbolized perfection. The only one of the ancient wonders that stillexists is in Giza, Egypt. This wonder is the Great Pyramid of Giza. It was one of three greatpyramids built around 2500 B.C. It is the oldest wonder of the seven. People do not know howthese pyramids were built but we know that they took over 20 years to complete. For a longtime, the Great Pyramid was believed to be the tallest structure in the world. Pyramids werebuilt as tombs for the leaders of Egypt called Pharaohs. Many travelers still visit the GreatPyramid today.The Hanging Gardens of Babylon are another ancient wonder. This wonder is specialbecause people do not know for sure if it existed. Old books say the garden was built around 600B.C. It was located on the bank of the Euphrates River. Today, this area is near Baghdad, Iraq.These gardens were built by a king for his wife. Living in the desert, she missed the plants at herold home. The king wanted to make his queen like their new home more. It may never beknown if the Hanging Gardens of Babylon truly existed, but the descriptions of this beautifulplace have made their place in history.The Greeks also added a couple of their own structures on the list of ancient wonders.The Statue of Zeus was built in Olympia, Greece in 457 B.C. This statue was built to honor theGreek god Zeus. The statue was as tall as a four-story building! It was made of wood anddecorated with gold and ivory. Unfortunately, the statue was destroyed by a fire and no longerexists for us to see.In addition to Zeus, the Greeks also built a very big statue to honor the Greek sun god,Helios. This wonder is known as the Colossus of Rhodes. The Colossus of Rhodes took twelveyears to build. It was finished in 226 B.C. It was 110 feet high. That is about the same size asthe Statue of Liberty. Also like the Statue of Liberty, the Colossus of Rhodes was placed at theentrance to a harbor.Built around 550 B.C., the Temple of Artemis at Ephesus was considered the mostbeautiful structure on earth. It was built to honor the goddess of hunting, nature, and fertility.Ephesus was an ancient city that was located in what is now Turkey. The temple was made ofmarble and had many bronze statues. People used to come from all over the world to worshipArtemis. The temple was later burned down and now there is only a marshy field where thiswonder once stood.Another wonder was also located in what is now Turkey. It was the Mausoleum atHalicarnassus. This tomb was built for King Mausolus of Caria. Some of the best artists andcraftsmen of the time period helped build and decorate this beautiful tomb. The mausoleum wasfinished around 350 B.C. Later, several earthquakes damaged the mausoleum. A group calledthe Knights of St. John later used the ruins to build a castle. King Mausolus’s name and hisconnection with such a special tomb led people to use the word mausoleum.The only wonder built for a practical use was the Pharos of Alexandria. This was alighthouse off the coast of Egypt. It was once the tallest building in the world. There was a verylarge mirror inside this lighthouse. It was used to reflect sunlight to help warn ships that theywere getting close to the shoreline. At night, a fire was lit inside the Pharos of Alexandria tohelp sailors. The design and building of this lighthouse started in 290 B.C. It was later ruined byearthquakes. However, it remained longer than any of the wonders, other than the GreatPyramid.The Seven Wonders of the Ancient World are unknown to many people because most ofthese structures were destroyed so long ago. While it is sad people cannot see most of thesewonders in person, the detailed stories about them help people know how special they were. 